Discussions of the separation of powers tend to be related to the administrative state. By contrast, this research addresses the question of separating powers within the criminal justice system of Kuwait, examining the function of this division and the structures that are designed to protect the rights of citizens. Despite being formally regulated according to democratic principles, the criminal justice system of Kuwait has been described as excessively controlled by executive bodies. Currently, there appears to be a lack of research explaining how numerous criminal justice bodies in Kuwait can effectively promote the principles of freedom, democracy, and equality before the law, and separation of powers is an important factor which can be connected to such outcomes. The research aims to provide insights into the separation of powers between institutions and to assess its effectiveness in addressing the principles stated in the Constitution of Kuwait. The origins of the modern Kuwaiti criminal justice system will also be explored, with a focus on British jurisdiction (as a past influence) and French, Egyptian and Islamic law (as continuing influences). This development history makes Kuwait an excellent example of the fusion and diffusion of law, which, although it has been investigated widely, is still a topic of interest among modern researchers, alongside human rights and their protection through the criminal law system. This is one of the first studies to discuss the separation of powers in the Kuwaiti criminal justice system as a mixed phenomenon that can influence the protection of Kuwaiti citizens’ human rights at each stage of law enforcement and prosecution. The Separation of Powers in a criminal justice system can be regarded as a method of protecting citizens’ rights from bias, corruption, and inequality in judging. The history of the phenomenon has involved several milestones and was the product of the minds of multiple notable figures. For example, Aristotle introduced a number of constitution-related ideas in his Politics, especially in books two – seven, which considered citizenship, types of regimes, and constitution. With respect to separation of powers, the author distinguished between “the deliberative body, the magistracies and the judges” in book four, suggesting that such separation could prevent absolute power.Furthermore, in his criticism of the then-existing patriarchal system of power, Locke focused on separation of powers in the context of legislation and formulated the “principle of legislative supremacy in the sense that it envisions the legislature as having an initiating place on the assembly line of law-making/law enforcement”, arguing that an “authority that is able to give laws to others must necessarily be the superior of the latter”. It may be inferred that Locke did not only try to distinguish the judicial system; he also implied that there was a hierarchy of the branches of power, with the legislative one being the “supreme power”. However, the principle of separating powers was most clearly formulated by Montesquieu, who focused on the idea of separation of powers between “the three sorts of power: the legislative; the executive in respect to things dependent on the law of nations; and the judiciary in regard to matters that depend on the civil law”. Montesquieu based his view on a comprehensive analysis of a variety of systems, including ancient ones (for example, those of “Romans” and “Barbarians”) and those that were contemporary at the time (for example, that of England). While not the first to pinpoint the idea of separation of powers, Montesquieu is believed to be the first person to fully and explicitly formulate the idea of tripartite separation of powers, aiming to “prevent the concentration of all power in the hands of a single ruler”. It is also noteworthy that the Islamic practice of using separation of powers started with Umar ibn Al-Khattab (- AD), who was the second Caliph of Islam. He may have been the first person to implement a form of separation of powers, in particular, to isolate the judiciary from the executive branch. This outcome was achieved by appointing both judges and governors in the provinces, both of which were supposed to be under the supervision of the Caliph. This measure ensured their independence from each other, although, eventually, the judiciary depended on the Caliph. The papers on the topic do not connect the Caliph’s decision to Aristotle. Thus, the Islamic roots of separation of powers can also be found, and they are related to the practice of separation of powers. It can also be argued that Islam as such can support separation of powers due to the religions’ moral ideals, as well as the concept of impartial justice (“’Adl”), which is a common notion in Islam. Thus, the concept of separation of powers can be connected to the history of certain countries, as well as their religion, which might have had lasting effects on modern-day separation of powers. The discussions around the separation of powers appear to be related to administrative or public law in the majority of cases. In her study, Barkow states that although scholars have written many works on the separation of powers in a state, they “have wholly ignored the criminal state”. Barkow mentions at least a dozen works that illustrate her point, explaining that she had analysed only a small sample of the literature. She does not specify the jurisdictions studied in the literature, but she specifically discusses the US and points out that the US criminal justice separation of powers was not studied extensively. It is noteworthy that the majority of the works that she mentions were written in the previous century. Still, the problem appears to have been carried into the new century: the consideration of the administrative side of separation of powers is exemplified by multiple works, including those by Koven, Bruff, Kamali, and Tribe. There are also works like those by Haljan and Nelson and Ringsmuth which can be used to illustrate the papers that mention the judiciary in the context of separation of powers, but such examples seem to be underrepresented and they do not focus on the topic. At the same time, it is important to achieve the separation of powers in the field of justice as it allows the judicial system to be independent and it improves its legitimacy, which is highlighted, for example, by Hall. An analysis of Ashworth’s conclusions can be interpreted to suggest that this importance also correlates with a history of challenges in ensuring the judiciary’s independence, which the author recognises as “failures of state-led criminal justice”. These failures can be the result of the difficulties the judiciaries experience in resisting external pressures, which the government is supposed to reduce, if not nullify. Similarly, Barkow demonstrates that the administrative and criminal perspectives on the separation of powers are noticeably different, and in practice, few safeguards, including individual rights as delineated in the Constitution, are applied to the latter. Still, as claimed by Ashworth, “it should remain the responsibility of the state towards its citizens to ensure that justice is administered by independent and impartial tribunals”. Thus, the authors demonstrate the significance and complexity of criminal-matter separation of powers, which indicates the need to acknowledge and study it. The present thesis aspires to do so. In his analysis of the criminal justice, Ashworth also refers to the principle of the rule of law, stating that the “state ought, out of fairness to the people in respect of whom its coercive powers are being exercised, to insist on ‘rule of law’ principles”. Due to its connection to separation of powers, the concept of the rule of law should be considered. Arguably, the idea existed since the times of ancient Greece, and it is evidenced to be referenced in the Magna Carta of . There is no individual definition of the concept, but the idea presupposes ensuring the supremacy of law to the point where “our law itself will rule (govern) us, not the wishes of powerful individuals”. In other words, the rule of law is opposed to the rule of individuals who can abuse their power. Also, the rule of law requires the equality of people in the face of the law. The concept can be viewed as a moral ideal.In fact, as can be shown by the study of Thompson’s perception of the rule of law, only “just” law can be incorporated into the concept. The idea of the importance of the rule of law did not stop Thompson from criticising the legislation that protected privileged groups at the expense of minorities. Therefore, the rule of law is mostly concerned with the idea of constraining the ruling class from abusing their power. A similar suggestion is made in “Opposing the Rule of Law” by Nick Cheesman: here, it is highlighted that the rule of law is mostly a theoretical concept that is predominantly introduced to ensure the lack of absolute power, but it requires just laws and well-developed means of enforcing them, as well as equality, for actual justice to take place.According to Williamson, the idea is especially applicable to Islam because Islamic leaders are supposed to act “in accordance with God’s law”. However, the author states that in practice, the rule of law is not always observable even when the leaders of particular countries are Muslim. For instance, the Kuwaiti Constitution “severely curtails who is eligible to be the leader,” which implies that there are individual people who hold power. As for the equality of people, the Kuwaiti Constitution guarantees this principle, stating that “people are peers in human dignity and have, in the eyes of the Law, equal public rights and obligations”. In real life, this principle is not always observed, which highlights the importance of studying the Kuwaiti judiciary to determine its strengths and weaknesses. Thus, the application of the idea of the rule of law to Kuwait justifies the present critique, and the concept of the rule of law is related to separation of powers because it aims at protecting people from power abuse. However, they are not the same, and the present work focuses on separation of powers.The current research aims to examine how the separation of powers in the criminal justice system of Kuwait contributes to addressing citizens’ rights, with the focus on the principles mentioned in the Constitution of Kuwait. Article  of the Kuwaiti Constitution declares the principle of separation of powers at the level of the state: “In conformity with the provisions of the Constitution the system of government shall be established on the basis of separation and cooperation of powers”, and moreover, “No Authority shall be allowed to waive all or part of its jurisdiction as prescribed in this Constitution”. Still, the legal background for the separation of powers principles in the state is not derived solely from the Constitution. Much attention will be paid to discussing the effect of British jurisdiction (as a past influence), as well as the continuing impact of the French and Egyptian law on the development of the criminal justice system in a country that gained independence from the United Kingdom in . The term “British jurisdiction” is used here the way it is used by Hijazi who employs it to describe the type of jurisdiction that was established in Kuwait by the British government in  and existed until . From now on, it will be used without quotation marks as a purely historical term in this thesis. Furthermore, it is important to take into account the fact that Kuwait has been significantly influenced by Islam, but that Muslim law does not affect all the areas of the law of Kuwait; mostly, it touches family and financial law.Based on this information, the study will examine the extent to which an effective separation of powers exists in the Kuwaiti criminal justice system. The first step is a general overview of the intricate net of functions that are shared and divided between institutions and personnel, and which are typical of the country’s criminal justice system. The second step is a discussion of critical problems in the system and its functioning, involving the question of the protection of citizens’ rights. The Kuwaiti criminal justice system can be described as mixed in its origins. Also, it is not fully protected from over-bureaucratisation, dishonest or wrongful conduct, possible biases, and unfairness. Due to the significance of these challenges, the analysis of police structures, prosecutors’ responsibilities, and the judiciary, with a focus on the role of Article  in determining the separation of powers, are the most important parts of this research. Some attention should be paid to the role of prosecutors and the prosecutorial process in Kuwait, which are influenced by the traditions of French law. Discussion of this process allows conclusions to be drawn regarding the effectiveness of the separation of powers in Kuwait, with the focus on conducting unbiased crime-control procedures. The analysis should include a discussion of the positive aspects of the criminal justice system of Kuwait; that is, the aspects that can guarantee the maintenance and protection of human rights in the country. In this thesis, this concept refers to the resources that are available to the representatives of different branches of the system for the purpose of organising an effective prosecutorial process and litigation. Finally, conclusions and recommendations need to be provided regarding the role of separation of powers in the criminal justice system in protecting Kuwaiti citizens’ rights. The recommendations will be formulated referring to the analysis of the criminal justice system’s mixed structure. A certain typology of separation of powers assessment criteria is also proposed for the study. A most significant criterion is the level of the independence of the judiciary, which can be assessed by pinpointing the instances of supervision and control performed by other branches of power. In particular, in Kuwait, the procedures that are connected to the appointments of judges imply a lack of judicial independence from the executive power. Thus, the procedures of the judiciary, including the appointment and removal of judges, can be reviewed to assess separation of powers. Apart from that, the management of cases, especially those related to political crimes, the protection of the rights of offenders and inmates, and the work of the appeal system, might signal independence difficulties. If miscarriages of justice can be pinpointed, they will also be analysed for external pressures. Finally, police conduct, including interrogation, is of interest for the study. The definitions of the key terms will be discussed below where they will be identified in the context of Kuwait. It should also be mentioned that the proposed study uses the work of Barkow as a basis for its theoretical framework. The article considers the context of the United States, and Barkow notes that although the risk of abuse and prejudice can be reduced with the separation of powers, “more stringent enforcement of the separation of powers in criminal cases” may be very helpful. As a result of its focus on the US, Barkow’s work will not provide the data on Kuwait, but it will offer extensive coverage of criminal-matters separation of powers. In addition, it will assist in considering the research and practice in the field of separation of powers in several countries to form the argument for Kuwait. The current research will be devoted to the following research question: How effectively does the separation of powers between institutions in the criminal justice system of Kuwait, which is rooted in the country’s Constitution and demonstrates the impacts of several law systems, contribute to protecting the rights of citizens, and what can be done to ensure this protection? In accordance with the question, the following aims will be pursued:To discuss how the separation of powers between institutions in the criminal justice system of Kuwait, as a constitutional monarchy, contributes to protecting the rights of citizens and influences fairness and effectiveness in the criminal justice system, with a focus on suspects’ rights.To take into account the role of French, Egyptian, and Islamic law, and/or legal principles, in the development and division of the criminal justice system in Kuwait while discussing separation of powers. Also, to take into account the role of British jurisdiction as a past influence.To assess the role of Article  of the Constitution of Kuwait in promoting the separation of powers in the criminal justice system.To consider what can be done to guarantee that the separation of powers in the criminal justice system of Kuwait leads to fulfilling the democratic principles enshrined in the Constitution.To determine whether improved protection of individuals’ rights (the constitutional provisions of which Barkow regards as a safeguard against discrimination and abuse) in Kuwait can be an alternative to the separation of powers in the criminal justice system from the point of view of their effectiveness in ensuring the protection of the people of Kuwait. The present research addresses the question of separating powers within the criminal justice system of Kuwait, examining the function of this division and the structures that are designed to protect the rights of citizens. Despite being regulated according to democratic principles, the criminal justice system of Kuwait has been described as excessively controlled by executive bodies. In order to be able to propose solutions for the issue, it is necessary to aggregate data pertinent to it, which explains the need for the present research. Currently, there appears to be a lack of research explaining how the numerous criminal justice bodies in Kuwait can be effective in promoting the principles of freedom, democracy, and equality before the law. The present research can provide some insights into the separation of powers between institutions and make an assessment of its effectiveness in addressing the principles stated in the Constitution of Kuwait. In addition, the current research allows a discussion about the origins of the modern Kuwaiti criminal justice system. The focus is on the past influence of the law of the United Kingdom (termed the “British jurisdiction”) from the times when Kuwait was a British protectorate, as well as the impact of French, Egyptian and Islamic law (as continuing influences). As a result of its history, Kuwait is a very good example of the diffusion of law; for instance, it was described as “mixed” by Williamson, a description that reflects its many components. The diffusion of law in Kuwait is a topic that has been investigated better than the separation of powers in the Kuwaiti criminal justice system, but it still attracts the attention of modern researchers. Therefore, the examination of this topic is also an appropriate aim for the research. Finally, the theme of human rights and their protection through the criminal law system is also a topic of acute interest. Thus, this study can be regarded as original because it aims to discuss an under-researched topic, and it is valuable because it touches upon topics of acute interest in the field. Ultimately, the thesis will discuss the separation of powers in the Kuwaiti criminal justice system as a mixed phenomenon that originated from French, Egyptian, and Islamic law, and one that can influence the protection of Kuwaiti citizens’ human rights at each stage of law enforcement and prosecution. In addition, the process of the drafting of the Constitution will be investigated. The Constitution was developed by the Constitution Committee, which included the members of the royal family and jurists, including the famous Egyptian jurist Abd al-Razzaq al-Sanhuri. It aimed to reflect democratic principles as well as the reality of Kuwait in the final draft, which was approved by Amir Abdullah Al-Salem Al-Sabah. The contribution of these people is also an important element to consider in a study of Kuwaiti separation of powers. During the creation of this thesis, the review of existing literature will help to aggregate current knowledge and pinpoint research gaps, and the empirical part of the thesis will contribute some new data. Thus, the study’s contribution to existing debates on the topic is the opportunity to cover gaps in the research literature on the topics associated with the separation of powers in the criminal justice system of Kuwait. Specifically, the study can contribute to the body of knowledge about the separation of powers because the current focus is on discussing separation of powers in the context of an administrative state, not a criminal justice system. Because of the significance of separation of powers in criminal justice, as well as the difficulties associated with ensuring it, the investigations of this topic and the results of such investigations are particularly valuable. Apart from that, there are few sources that consider Kuwaiti criminal justice or Kuwaiti separation of powers, but said sources still point out the presence of some issues, which need to be analysed and resolved. The study’s contribution is significant from this perspective as well. The results of the study can be used by researchers and practitioners to analyse the functions of the criminal justice system. Moreover, the results are necessary to assess the effectiveness of the system in protecting the rights of Kuwaiti citizens as a democratic priority. The study’s recommendations might be useful in addressing the complex structure of criminal justice bodies in Kuwait, and its outcomes will be relevant to the discussion of similar criminal justice systems based on the principles of different laws the way Kuwait’s hybrid law is influenced by French, Egyptian, and Islamic law. While the work focuses on Kuwait, its implications can be used in other contexts as well. In the present literature review, the topic of separation of powers will be considered from the point of view of criminal justice, and the Kuwaiti criminal justice will receive some attention. The article by Barkow will be analysed to demonstrate the significance of separation of powers in criminal justice and justify the article’s use as the present study’s framework. Political crimes and miscarriages of justice will also be defined and considered from the perspective of the Kuwaiti context. Overall, the chapter is dedicated to the coverage of the primary topics defined by the research questions through the analysis of primary and secondary sources that are available on the topic. The main reasons for the focus of this thesis on the separation of powers are the significance of the concept, its implications for criminal justice, and the issues with the coverage of the latter, especially in terms of criminal justice in Kuwait. The significance of separation of powers is supported by recent and older literature, which demonstrates its connection to the protection of human rights, prevention of power abuse, as well as the establishment of rule of law. Indeed, multiple authors argue that the separation of powers prevents the concentration and abuse of power, which, in turn, facilitates the protection of human rights and enables universal accountability to fair and fairly applied legislation, that is, the rule of law. As a result, the idea that separation of powers is valuable and potentially necessary for a democratic and lawful society is well-articulated by the literature. Furthermore, authors like Ashworth,  Barkow, and Cheesman discussed the concept in terms of criminal justice, indicating that it is critical for the protection of the people who are involved in the system. All these sources demonstrate that separation of powers a requirement for a lawful society, but they further suggest that the separation of powers is especially important for criminal justice. The central framework of this thesis, which is the article by Barkow, argues that the specifics of criminal justice and the interaction of powers inherent to it make separation of powers particularly crucial. The people involved in criminal justice, especially the defendants, are by definition a vulnerable population, and individual rights may fail to provide sufficient protection from systemic injustice. Furthermore, a judicial system requires a level of impartiality to perform its functions. Therefore, criminal-matters separation of powers may indeed be critical for protecting human rights and enabling the rule of law when it comes to criminal justice matters. From this perspective, it is also apparent that the independence of the judiciary is a critical element of the separation of powers. According to Sujit Choudhry, the independence of the judiciary is the “concrete expression” of the separation of powers, which, in turn, is a critical element of democracy. Indeed, the independence of the judiciary is predicated on the judiciary being impartial, unbiased, unprejudiced, independent from other political influences, and experiencing no fear. Consequently, the rule of law can be enabled by removing undue influences from the branch of power that holds a “particularly important” role “in safeguarding human rights,” that is, by ensuring the independence of the judiciary. The fact that the independence of the judiciary is required for a lawful society that respects human rights is covered fairly well in research, even though it does not focus on Kuwait. Thus, it can be concluded that the reasoning for the importance of the separation of powers, the need for the independence of the judiciary, and the enabling of the rule of law are similar; they are all deemed necessary to ensure the protection of human rights. It should also be noted that the concept of separation of powers is inextricably linked to its practical implications, the primary one of which is how to implement it. It is a common argument that complete separation of powers is difficult to achieve; in Kuwaiti Constitution, it is even pointed out that the branches are required to cooperate, which may complicate the process of separating their functions. The issue is further exacerbated by the fact that there is a lack of research on criminal-matters separation of powers. Indeed, Barkow points out that it is not very common for research literature and practitioners (for example, judges) to investigate the topic of criminal-justice separation of powers. Even though the article focuses on American literature and American realia, the lack of research on Kuwaiti separation of powers implies that the problem is even more acute for Kuwait. Thus, the importance of the separation of powers is well established in the literature. Additionally, the separation of powers is often considered from the perspectives of judicial independence. Therefore, it cannot be said that the separation of powers is not covered by the relevant literature. However, a few research gaps remain in it; in particular, criminal-justice separation of powers and Kuwaiti separation of powers have been overlooked by researchers. Since it is established that separation of powers is difficult to achieve, the lack of research on it implies there is little guidance for Kuwait on how to ensure it in its criminal justice system. In response to this research gap and in consistency with the significance of the chosen topics, the presented thesis was developed. It does not intend to respond fully to the stated concerns of the insufficient knowledge on criminal-matters and Kuwaiti separation of powers. However, it will introduce some primary data and review secondary research to contribute to finding a solution to the issue of establishing the context-appropriate means for promoting criminal-matters separation of powers in Kuwait. The concept of the separation of powers can be summarised as the idea that in order to avoid concentrating power in one hands, as well as preserving liberty and the rule of law, three different authorities or powers need to be formed and kept distinct and independent from one another. The authorities were defined by Montesquieu as the legislative branch of power, which is responsible for law-making, the executive branch of power, which is responsible for administering those laws, and the judicial branch, which consists of the court system responsible for interpreting and upholding legislation. Figure  represents this concept with a simple and commonly used diagram. Throughout its existence, the idea of separation of powers was adopted in a number of contexts, which allows conclusions to be drawn about its theoretical and practical value. A very early example of the use of separation of powers is the adoption of some of its elements by Umar ibn Al-Khattab (- AD). In particular, the judiciary was at least partially separated from the executive branch because a special position of judges was developed for individual provinces and territories. This position was fully separated from the role of governors for more effective management, even though both were under caliph’s supervision. There is some debate on the topic: according to Rehman, Ibrahim, and Bakar, one of the schools of thoughts argues that at that time of Umar ibn Al-Khattab, the judiciary was merged with the executive branch (which means that neither of them was controlling the other; they were just parts of the same branch). However, Rehman, Ibrahim, and Bakar highlight the evidence which indicates that the caliphs did delegate part of their power to judges. Apart from that, the authors focus on the principles of justice from the Quran, suggesting that in order to achieve justice, fairness, equity, and impartiality promoted by it, the judiciary needs to be independent. The authors present a clear and logical argument, which is based on historical evidence and the analysis of Quran. Therefore, the Islamic roots of separation of powers practice may be present. As argued by Goldoni, the early English and French constitutions (which both developed their own monarchy-based separation of powers versions) both reflect the concept of the separation of powers, even though the former may be more celebrated. It should be noted that the Constitution in England may be older if the Magna Carta of  is taken into account and viewed as a Constitution. It was followed by other important events which produced documents that can be described as constitutional, including the Bill of Rights of  and the Parliament Acts of . The first Constitution in France was adopted in , and the current one was adopted in . However, it is noteworthy that, according to Goldoni, France’s legal-matters separation of powers refers back to the pre-revolutionary “parlements” that performed “regulated resistance,” which modified the relationships between the monarchy and the nobility. In addition, as pointed out by Socarras, separation of powers has been demonstrated to be a legitimate means of protecting democracy or, rather, limiting absolute power by making it impossible to concentrate power in one place. As a result, the principle of the separation of powers, in which the three authorities are as distinct and independent as possible, is reflected in many modern constitutions, including those of the United Kingdom, the United States and France, among other countries. Indeed, in France, the Head of the State is the President who appoints the Prime Minister who is in charge of the executive power; the legislative body is the Parliament, which is elected by the people, and there is a number of independent courts. Thus, the idea of the separation of powers is supported here. The modern-day UK is a constitutional monarchy, which adheres to the concept of the rule of law and takes separation of powers into account in that there are separate executive (ministers), legislative (Parliament), and judicial (courts) branches. Therefore, as argued by Murphy and Stoica, it would be feasible to state that the separation of powers is typical of both common law and civil law systems. The aim of separation of powers, as pointed out by Montesquieu, is to “prevent the concentration of all power in the hands of a single ruler”. Therefore, Samuels must be correct in stating that separation of powers in a criminal justice system is meant to prevent power abuse and ensure the protection of the vulnerable populations. The population that is involved in the criminal justice system is indeed particularly vulnerable and requires effective safeguards, which is demonstrated by Barkow. However, Barkow also shows that historically, separation of powers in criminal matters was largely ignored by the researchers. In a similar way, Ashworth comments that the independence of the judiciary is of utmost importance. His paper “Responsibilities, Rights and Restorative Justice,” which focuses on the role of the state in restorative justice, comes to a conclusion that “it should remain the responsibility of the state towards its citizens to ensure that justice is administered by independent and impartial tribunals”. Ashworth does admit that state-led justice is not always successful in delivering security, but for this investigation, it is important that he acknowledges the significance of the right to independent tribunals, which implies the necessity for ensuring that the judiciary is separated from the rest of the power branches and is not influenced by them. It is noteworthy that unlike Barkow, who considers the case of the US, Ashworth appears to refer to English law. Thus, the two authors highlight the difficulty of ensuring separation of powers in criminal justice and postulate its importance from different perspectives. As a result, the present study intends to attract attention to criminal justice separation of powers and investigating related issues. The term criminal justice that is employed in this thesis can be defined as “the formal social institution designed to respond to deviance defined as crime”. This definition is supplied by Travis and Edwards. The authors also report that the system is typically said to have three subsystems: “law enforcement, courts, and corrections”. The first one is concerned with enforcing laws, which is carried out by specific agencies through the activities related to crime: its prevention, detection, and response to it (investigation and apprehension). The second one consists of the courts that uphold laws by resolving disputes, and the third one is concerned with punitive operations, as well as rehabilitation. Criminal justice systems are complex and vary from country to country, and Kuwaiti criminal justice system will be discussed in the next chapter. The article by Rachel E. Barkow presents a critical analysis of the classical approach to separation of powers and demonstrates the fact that criminal-matters separation of powers has the specific features that require a different approach. According to Barkow, the typical approach to separation of powers which is applied to administrative law consists of a relatively flexible “blending of powers” combined with regular checking aimed at ensuring the lack of power abuse. The flexibility can provide the opportunity to step back from full, complete separation of powers in order to enable the “government to respond more readily to criminal matters”. On the other hand, an alternative approach would consist of strict adherence to separation of powers in criminal matters to ensure the lack of power abuse which, in this context, can have disastrous consequences. In other words, Barkow views separation of powers as a form of possible protection of the population from power abuse, which can technically be modified (be made less strict and more flexible) as long as it is combined with another safeguard (checks in the first example). When analysing the separation of powers in the US, Barkow claims that the criminal-matters separation of powers happens to follow the flexible approach with the exception of checks, which the author defines as insufficient, claiming that only the Constitutional rights can be considered criminal-matters safeguards in the country. According to the author, they are not sufficient when structural power abuse is concerned. As a result, Barkow suggests that criminal-matters separation of powers is a field that needs separate, specific attention and consideration when determining its significance and potential forms, as well as safeguards. The author criticises the lack of attention to the topic within academic literature, offers an analysis of the separation of powers that she observed in the US and proposes a different approach, as well as the justification of the reasons for her suggestions. While the specifics of the US separation of powers are not pertinent to the present study, the rest of the article can be viewed as the framework adopted by the current investigation. In particular, Barkow claims that separation of powers in criminal matters is particularly important because of the potential negative outcomes (threat to human rights) of power abuse, that strict separation of powers in criminal matters is a working mechanism for preventing power abuse because it directly prevents power from accumulating in a specific branch, and that this approach would be functional within the criminal matters context specifically because of the features of that context. Consequently, Barkow advocates for a more vigorous enforcement of separation of powers within the criminal-matters context, indicating that given the strict use of separation of powers in administrative matters, there “is all the more reason to use it in the criminal context, where the stakes are higher and the potential for abuse is so much greater”. The argument of Barkow that there is a lack of academic discussion on the topic is supported by the present thesis; aside from a few passing notes of the topic of criminal justice that have been considered here, minimal relevant literature has been identified. The works that do mention criminal justice rarely critique the separation of powers that is applied to them. An example is the paper by Conway, which remarks on criminal matters predominantly in footnotes with almost no commentary. Overall, it appears that Barkow is correct in the statements about the need for additional research in the field. Thus, Barkow’s work can be regarded as a framework that guides the current research from the point of view of its content and methodology, which is a decision that needs to be justified. The article by Rachel E. Barkow has been introduced into this discussion due to its unique focus on the different approaches to criminal-justice matters; no similar article was found that would cover this topic, especially for Kuwait. Certain criticisms of the choice of Barkow for this project need to be addressed. Thus, the article focuses on the US, and it specifically discusses the different views and practices of criminal justice separation of powers in terms of that context. As a result, not all of the presented information can be considered relevant for Kuwait. However, there are many justifications for applying Barkow’s review to Kuwaiti contexts. First, there is a sufficient amount of theoretical information in Barkow’s work, which exists to explain the importance of criminal-justice matters or the possible approaches to it. This information is universally applicable, which makes it relevant for a thesis on Kuwait. Moreover, Barkow’s review is of relevance to a study on Kuwait since certain similarities can be found in the development of the Kuwaiti separation of powers and that of other governments. For example, the process that characterises the development of the Kuwaiti separation of powers can be termed democratisation, which has been taking place in countries all over the world as shown by Stepan, Linz, and Minoves. Also, Barkow provides a sound argument for the idea that criminal-matters separation of powers is strongly connected to (and even rooted in) the Constitution, which can be used to justify the approach used by the study. Similarly, works by Samuels and Al-Zumai illustrate the way the constitutions of different countries, including Kuwait, establish the separation of powers principle. Furthermore, since there is no similar article with Kuwait at the forefront, no suitable alternative could be found in any case. Therefore, employing Barkow’s review in a Kuwait-focused thesis is generally justified despite the differences in contexts. However, another concern may also be raised; Barkow’s work is not very recent, and it is almost  years old. Given that it makes claims about the presence and absence of the literature related to the researched topic, Barkow’s literature review, which predominantly cites papers from the previous century, might be outdated. This issue was resolved within this thesis by reviewing other similar literature. The effort supported the issue reported by Barkow; even though it managed to uncover some other relevant literature, this thesis also demonstrates that criminal-matters separation of powers is not very often studied. Few sources that would even mention criminal-matters separation of powers were encountered, and none would explicitly focus on it and problematize it. For instance, Haljan describes the judicial branch of power in the UK and mentions criminal law from the point of view of the validity of international criminal legislation, but neither of the topics is paid much attention in this book. Nelson and Ringsmuth consider the separation of powers between Court and Congress in the US with a focus on the importance of the independence of the judiciary, but they mostly cover public opinion on the topic. Conway mentions the criminal-matters decision-making in the EU. The author shows that the legislative, executive, and judicial powers in the EU cooperate in the cases of criminal offences and sanctions with the executives being able to prompt the legislative bodies to propose new legislation or veto decisions. However, this topic is only mentioned in the article without any detailed analysis. Similarly, Ashworth highlights the importance of the independence of tribunals, which can be extended to the judiciary in general, although this article does not focus on the topic. Nick Cheesman also mentions separation of powers in the judiciary, mostly describing the way the judicial system of Burma failed to achieve it throughout the British rule in the country. The author does not comment extensively on the situation; mostly, the book just explains the events that resulted in the lack of separation of powers, which included the beliefs of the officials (between  and ) and particular circumstances (for instance, the political instability in the aftermath of the World War II). In summary, the criminal-matters perspective seems to be rarely covered, and there is no live discussion on the topic to be provided in this thesis. In addition to the current literature review that was carried out for this thesis, it can be pointed out that while Barkow’s paper is treated as a framework, it has been merged together with other papers, some of which support and some of which expand Barkow’s review. As a result, the reliance on Barkow’s work does not prevent the thesis from reflecting other relevant literature, including some more recent works. To summarise, the choice of Barkow’s review for this thesis is explained by its unique position as an article that very deliberately and expressly focuses on criminal-matters separation of justice with attention paid to the literature that had existed on the topic prior to the paper’s publication. While its application to Kuwaiti context has its limitations, it is still justified. Consequently, Barkow’s work functions as a framework for this thesis, providing some structure and evidence for it. The criminal justice system of Kuwait includes the typical elements of such a system; according to Morison and Grimshaw, such elements include the law enforcement agencies, the courts, and the correctional institutions. Additionally, the executives who are involved in the system can be viewed as another element, and the criminal justice employs the legislation, which is developed by the legislative body (in Kuwait, the Amir and the National Assembly). Thus, the justice system is the product of the cooperation of different branches of power: the legislation is the result of the work of the legislative power, the law is enforced by the executive branch, and the courts belong to the judicial one. As a result, separation of powers should be particularly important for criminal justice, but, as will be shown below, it is not always the case. The Kuwaiti Penal Code (Law No.  of ) contains the information pertinent to crimes and penalties, and the criminal procedures are guided by the Kuwait Code of Criminal Procedure (Law No.  of ). Overall, however, very few recent resources are available on the topic of the criminal justice system in Kuwait, especially when research articles, official statistics, and reports are considered. For instance, the attempts at finding the statistics related to appeals were not successful. When researching political crimes, which is one of the separation of powers criteria proposed within this research, a lack of resources that would consider this phenomenon in Kuwait is apparent. In fact, there is no such term as “political crime” that would appear in the country’s Penal Code. However, the National Security Law, which is the Law No.  of  (Act Amending the Provisions of the Penal Code), seems to be dedicated to this topic. Indeed, the law focuses on the crimes that can be concerned with state security, describing them and stating the related punishments. This piece of legislation can be connected to the UN Counter-Terrorism Strategy since it incorporates the crimes that can be described as terrorism. Thus, the Law No.  of  can be viewed as one of the measures intended to build the capacity of Kuwait to prevent or combat such events. However, the law has been labelled as insufficiently detailed, which, according to specialists, might result in abuse. Mousavi described an example in which a woman’s tweet was reinterpreted to imply “reproach of the Prince person,” which is punishable according to Article  of the law. While a single case study cannot be viewed as a pattern, the author uses it to uncover the elements of the legislation that can be used as loopholes for power abuse, which, at the very least, makes the effectiveness of the law questionable. Moreover, since the term “political crime” is not used by the document, it is difficult to determine if this category of crime is specifically acknowledged and regulated by the Kuwaiti government. From this perspective, the Law is not effective in combating terrorism from the viewpoint of the UN since the organisation requires ensuring the protection of human rights while implementing relevant measures. Thus, both specialists and the UN view the means of addressing the issue of political crimes in Kuwait as insufficiently effective. Secondary sources on the topic are also rather rare, which limits the ability of this study to assess the way political crimes are handled in the country. Thus, Kuwaiti criminal system can be viewed as under-researched. However, a report developed with the help of the Kuwait International Legal Research Centre and the Queen’s University of Belfast has provided a short overview of the system and its problems in . The Kuwait International Legal Research Centre, which is a private educational organisation, commissioned this report. The aim of the Centre was to find out the issues that were encountered by Kuwaiti prosecution. However, the report considers a number of problems that are related to the criminal justice in general. The methods of the report included literature review, interviews with stakeholders, and scenario analysis, but as a report rather than an academic article, it does not cover the procedures in great detail. As a result, it is difficult to assess the rigour of the study. Still, it is the most recent report on the topic, and it is well-referenced, especially in terms of cited legislation, which improves its credibility. One of the first concerns that the report considers consists of the fact that the criminal justice system of Kuwait does not exhibit a “principled” or “coherent” structure, which is why some important elements are missing. According to the report, this issue makes the strategic development of the system more difficult and hinders the process of policy formation. Similarly, the authors mention the lack of officials’ training, insufficient guidance (code of practice) for crime investigation, and resource shortages, as well as some more specific challenges. The report focuses on problems without considering the positive elements. Still, the mentioned issues are important to review in the present research since they provide the opportunity for analysing the concerns of Kuwaiti criminal justice system, which may be pertinent to the analysis of its separation of powers. Apart from that, Morison and Grimshaw find that the Kuwaiti government and legal and academic communities have expressed the idea that the justice system of Kuwait requires some improvement. Therefore, the analysis of the data from the report appears to be particularly important. To avoid confusion, it is necessary to consider the topics that were identified as two of the criteria of separation of powers assessment: political crimes and miscarriages of justice. Since the term “political crime” is not used in Kuwait, it is virtually impossible to find relevant literature that would define this phenomenon within the country’s context. Additionally, this complex term has multiple definitions, which further complicates establishing one for Kuwait. However, for the present thesis, political crimes will be defined most broadly: as the crimes which are committed against or by the state. They can be domestic, in which the citizens of a state violate its legislation with the aim of attacking the state; the cases when the state or its officials violate the rights of its citizens are also a part of this category. They can also be international; for instance, the attack on the embassies of a foreign state could be considered a political crime as well. Thus, based on the currently existing literature and for the purposes of this project, political crimes are identified predominantly by their motives (which are usually ideology-driven), perpetrators (often the state, including its officials, or its opposition), and victims (typically the state or its citizens). In Kuwait, a law can be used to persecute political criminals as identified by the above-presented definition. In particular, the National Security Law considers state security crimes. However, based on the literature review, which includes an academic article and the comments of international human rights organisations, the practice shows that this legislation can lead to power abuse and tends to be employed to prosecute the opposition for stating their views. This tendency can be explained by the fact that the law reportedly uses unclear phrasing and can be interpreted to prohibit the criticism of the royal family. As a result, it is logical to consider the topic of the miscarriages of justice. This term is also difficult to define, but technically, miscarriage of justice consists of false conviction, which is described as the result of deficient legal procedures. However, certain researchers have been including the unjust application of laws, including unlawful detention, in the definition. The prosecutions for defamation and blasphemy in Kuwait can be viewed as an appropriate illustration for miscarriages of justice. According to a recent periodic review carried out by the UN Human Rights Committee to examine Kuwait’s human rights practices, the related legislation may cause issues with exercising freedoms of thought and conscience. For instance, in , a person was sentenced to  years in prison for blasphemy, which consisted of an apparently insulting statement in his social media account. Similarly, in , a person was sentenced to  years in prison for alleged defamation of the judiciary in a blog. The main problem of such cases is that the legislation which they refer to does not state clearly what an offence constitutes, which is why it is difficult to determine if a person has indeed committed a crime or not. For example, such legislation can use terms that are difficult to define or conditions that are difficult to prove like “the intention of eroding the state’s status” or the violation of “the princedom attribute”.As a result of this situation, it is possible to prosecute people who make any kind of political commentary. Also, it is noteworthy that the mentioned blasphemy legislation seems to be employed against human rights activists. The situation in which the commitment of crime cannot be determined does not prove the existence of miscarriages of justice, but it implies the possibility of such an event occurring and offers loopholes for it. Thus, obscure legislation and the lack of the law on political crimes are a problem in Kuwait. Additionally, from the perspective of a broader definition of the miscarriages of justice, several issues can be noted. While there is legislation which is supposed to prevent arbitrary arrest, it is still reported to occur, as well as the torture and beatings of detainees, which are outlawed in Kuwait. There are reports of unsanitary conditions and overcrowding in prisons by human rights organisations. They may fail to specify the source of such information, but anecdotal evidence is often provided by them, which is enough to prove the existence of the issue. However, no official reports or statistics on the matter have been discovered during this research. It is not clear if this issue is to be included in the miscarriage of justice category, but it definitely constitutes a problem with human rights and the rights of incarcerated people. Thus, a number of concerns are reported for the Kuwaiti criminal justice. Since the time of its early versions (like those present during the rule of Umar ibn Al-Khattab) and until modern Constitutions, separation of powers was used to prevent power abuse. Specifically, separation of powers was shown to be able to keep power distributed between several branches, enabling their independence from one another and preventing the development of absolute power. The present literature review shows that the significance of separation of powers is well established by the research on the topic. However, criminal-matters separation of powers is less extensively covered, which is a major conclusion of Barkow’s work, as well as this literature review, which attempted to find the articles that would disprove this assertion. Barkow demonstrates that the significance of separation of powers in criminal justice cannot be overstated because of the potentially devastating effects of power abuse within it, including, for example, miscarriages of justice. The lack of attention to criminal-justice separation of powers in modern literature implies that more research on the topic is needed. Thus, the literature review justifies the present investigation. In a similar way, the research devoted to the criminal justice of Kuwait is limited, especially as far as peer-reviewed academic papers are considered. However, some relevant literature does document potential problems, especially those related to political crimes. The main problem of these findings is the low quality of sources, some of which do not detail their methodology or provide the source of their assertions. However, most of them are provided by academics, academic institutions, or human rights organisations, which lends some legitimacy to their conclusions and makes them impossible to ignore. Additionally, the triangulation of the sources that report the same phenomena might be improving the quality of the conclusions drawn despite the low quality of some of the sources. Thus, the presented findings are justified, even though it is important to view them through the lens of the literature’s limitations. As shown by Barkow’s article, which is the framework of the present study, the development of criminal-matters separation of powers is a crucial element of Kuwaiti’s democratisation, and it is an important guarantee of the protection of the freedoms and rights of Kuwaiti people, which is especially evident in the light of the issues and barriers that the recent research on the criminal justice of Kuwait uncovers. As a result, the current thesis aspired to investigate separation of powers, primarily by considering its constitutional and historical roots and discussing its effectiveness from the point of view of human rights’ protection. The information gathered from the literature review was used to guide the development of some of the interview questions for this investigation, especially those related to separation of powers and the criminal justice system of Kuwait. According to Stepan et al., in Kuwait, the history of the separation of powers is related to the history of the country and its constitution, and it can be regarded as an example of the democratisation of a monarchy. Zahlan reports that Kuwait has a rich history that, among other things, involved being a centre of trade. In , oil was discovered in the area, which, according to O’Shea, Spilling, and Cavendish, spurred on the country’s economic growth after the Second World War. Admittedly, the abundance of resources can have various outcomes, including the “resource curse” and the issue that was especially topical for Kuwait right after the proclamation of its independence: the aggression of other countries. However, the economic growth of Kuwait is described as a facilitator of the democratisation of the country, as exemplified by freedom of expression in the press, which, as reported by Casey, has been greater than anywhere else in the Arab world since the previous century. Apart from that, Salameh and Al-Sharah suggest that the proclamation of the country’s independence in  was a major step towards its democratisation. Thus, the specifics of the country’s economic and political development might have prepared it for the introduction of an increasingly independent separation of powers. Also, Salameh and Al-Sharah argue that the development of education and increased awareness of political concepts has contributed to the process. Similarly, the integration of Western liberal attitudes into the life of the people of Kuwait must have mirrored the adoption of the separation of powers, which may have seemed premature at the time but appears to have been carried out smoothly; this idea is proposed by Hijazi. It should be pointed out that citizenship of Kuwait is a birthright in accordance with the Constitution; it is connected to the nationality of the father of the child as stated in the Nationality Law. In other words, a child fathered by a Kuwaiti in any country is Kuwaiti; also, foundlings found in Kuwait are considered Kuwaiti. Furthermore, Kuwaiti citizenship can be granted for prolonged residence in the country (at least  consecutive years for Arab people), for various services to Kuwait, and other factors. As a result of the long period of citizenship acquisition, there are stateless people (Bedoons) in Kuwait. The UN Human Rights Committee points out that the status is associated with discrimination, including limited access to social services, and urges Kuwait to find the means of registering this group. Kuwaiti population in the country accounts for around %, and the expatriates come from other Arab countries (about % of the total population), Asia (about %), and Africa (.%), as well as some other countries (slightly more than %). The small number of natives has been a concern for the government, which is reflected in its attempts to promote the Kuwaitization of the country’s business. The population of Kuwait is predominantly Muslim (%), but there are also Christians (%), and other religions. Thus, there is a notable diversity in Kuwait, which should be taken into account when considering the protection of human rights. According to Barkow, in the United States, “the Constitution separates legislative, executive, and judicial power to prevent tyranny and protect liberty”, and this principle works for many countries, including Kuwait. As reported by Salameh and Al-Sharah, the Constitution of Kuwait was adopted in  after the country was proclaimed independent, and Hijazi states that the principles of the codified law system were reflected in its articles. According to Hijazi, the Kuwaiti Constitution reflects and determines the approach to dividing powers in the country’s criminal justice system. Articles  and  state that Kuwait has a democratic government and its justice system is based on the principles of democracy and equality. In addition, Article  of the Constitution notes that the state guarantees the security and protection of its citizens. Article  of the Constitution declares the principle of the separation of powers for the state, which is reflected in the criminal justice system. Alhajeri demonstrates that the Constitution creates a threefold separation of powers and entrusts specific powers in its elements, whilst also requiring that they are independent of each other. In her article, Barkow also answers the question about the role of the Constitution in determining the separation of powers for the criminal justice system. She states that “each branch must agree before criminal power can be exercised against an individual. Congress must criminalise the conduct, the executive must decide to prosecute, and the judiciary (judges and juries) must convict”. The same approach is also followed in Kuwait because Parliament criminalises the conduct, guidelines for prosecutors are written according to the Constitution, and the judiciary is responsible for convicting, employing the principles of law adopted from the French and Egyptian systems. An analysis of the Constitution of Kuwait reveals an important element of its articles: the figure of the Amir. The legislative power is “vested in the Amir and the National Assembly”; the executive power “shall be vested in the Amir, the Cabinet and the Ministers,” and the judicial power “shall be vested in the Courts in the Amir’s name”. Article  also states that Ministers are appointed by the Amir, but the number of Ministers cannot be greater than one-third of the National Assembly, which is formed through “general direct secret ballot”. Both males and females are allowed to vote after they reach the age of , which is reported by the Freedom House. Thus, the people’s will is generally expressed by the National Assembly, and the suffrage of Kuwait is considered to be “near universal” and fair as suggested by Stepan et al. With respect to legislation, the Amir has the right to propose, sanction, and promulgate laws, and laws can be submitted by the National Assembly to the Amir. Also, the Amir can produce a variety of decrees that can be used to enforce laws, regulations, and “other necessary rules” in accordance with the Constitution. Thus, the legislative and executive powers are closely connected to the Amir, even though his power is balanced out by the Cabinet (chosen by himself, preferably from the National Assembly) and the National Assembly (chosen by the people). This balance can be compared, for example, to the relationship of the US President with the country’s Congress or even its political parties. The President of the US has notable power, including the ability to veto legislation, but the power and influence of the Congress and the civil society, both direct and indirect is aimed at keeping this power from becoming absolute. The candidates for the Kuwaiti National Assembly must be Kuwaiti, at least thirty years old, and fluent in Arabic; also, they have to correspond to the current requirements of the Electoral Law. According to Salameh and Al-Sharah, the Amir possesses great power, but the Constitution limits it notably. These claims will be investigated further in the thesis. It is acknowledged by modern researchers, for example, Al-Zumai, that the Assembly “plays an active and substantive role in governance, both in legislating and in monitoring the government,” especially when compared to the activities of parliaments in other constitutional monarchies of the region. In particular, Freedom House highlights the fact that the Amir’s decrees and the appointment of the Prime Minister can be controlled by the body to an extent. More than that, in  the National Assembly set forward the appointment of Amir Sheikh Sabah Al-Ahmad Al-Sabah, instead of the then-ailing Amir Sheikh Sa’ed Al-Abdulah Al-Sabah. As pointed out by Al-Zumai, this was considered an empowering step that signified a strengthening of democratic tendencies in Kuwait. As a result, Nader states that through the Assembly, the people became the source of sovereignty for the country. According to Selvik and Alnajjar, the people of Kuwait can be characterised as politically active. The Kuwaiti judiciary is supposed to be completely separated from the Amir since the Constitution states that “no Authority may wield any dominion over a Judge”. But the judges are expected to perform their duties in the name of the Amir. Also, Hall suggests that it is apparent that a country’s judicial system is unlikely to be completely immune to varied external forces. Still, the Alkarama Foundation insists that the Constitution of Kuwait postulates and demands the independence of the system from the direct influence of external forces, including the executive power. An approximate representation of the separation of powers in Kuwait appears in Figures  and . Figure  presents the key powers of the country, which include the four elements of the Amir, National Assembly, Court system, and Cabinet of Monisters. Figure  presents a slightly more detailed description of the bodies that are involved in each branch of the political life of Kuwait, including the police, judges, and prosecutors, who are also one of the foci of this thesis. Thus, the figures demonstrate a summary of the above-presented information and imply that in Kuwait, the authorities are not fully distinct or separate, which may be a cause for concern. Certain boundaries and obstacles to the continued development of Kuwaiti democracy have been identified, including political challenges (for example, power imbalances and a lack of unity in the opposition) and economic issues – the liberalisation of the economy is considered unfinished, which means that the government is not ready to relinquish its control over a number of economic aspects. An example is the ceilings of lending rates and amounts, which are restricted depending on the specifics of loans. As a result, lending cannot exceed particular amounts, and the total loans made by a bank are also limited to specific numbers. According to Al-Zumai, both economic and political problems tend to weaken the development of democracy, including the empowerment of Kuwaiti parliament and voters, which eventually hinders effective separation of powers. It has been established by Stepan et al. that the Amir still holds impressive power, which is enhanced by the extensive involvement of the country’s princes in political matters as Ministers. Also, Al-Zumai and Salameh and Al-Sharah report that a number of setbacks before  involved unconstitutional dissolutions of the Assembly. Fortunately, Al-Zumai states that the new century has seen only constitutional dissolutions. As a result, the democratisation of the country is incomplete. The analysis of key governmental bodies also indicates that majoritarianism appears to be present in the Kuwaiti political system. As reported by Schleiter and Belu, majoritarianism can be defined as an approach to politics that favours a particular majority, resulting in that majority being able to influence a country’s politics to a greater extent. Majoritarianism should not be confused with populism, which unites a range of ideas that are typically concerned with the division of the population into two groups. They are most often referred to “the people” and “the elite”. Populism is characterised with the tendency to propose the need for popular sovereignty, but unlike majoritarianism, populism views one group (the people) as morally better than the other group (the elite), which becomes the basis for the proposed social changes and prioritisation of the interests of the first group. Given the fact that judges are not immune to the influences of the powerful majority, majoritarianism is clearly an issue for separation of powers in criminal law. It is especially true for Egyptian judges in Kuwait, who are particularly unwilling to disturb the powerful groups of the country because the salary of a judge is greater in Kuwait than in Egypt; this problem is reported by Brown. As pointed out by Ashworth and Horder, the “individuals whose preferences are at odds with those of the majority” are bound to “lose out” in the case of democratic or participatory decision-making. Thus, the main problem with majoritarianism is the neglect of minorities, which attracts criticism and calls for an approach that is more representative. It is noteworthy that, as pointed out by Ashworth, offenders are a minority, which is why their protection from majoritarian prejudices is a significant concern. In addition, it can be pointed out that prisoners and perpetrators are considered morally inferior to the people who have not committed any crimes. This factor can be used to connect the issues of prisoners’ rights to populist ideas. From the perspective of the criticism of majoritarianism, a balance between the protection of the majority and the human rights of both groups needs to be found. In general, Dajani reports that majoritarianism is relatively typical for Asian countries, and Kuwait does not appear to be an exception. To sum up, the existing state of affairs in Kuwait (as reported by recent literature) might not be regarded as an illustration of the theoretically ideal separation of powers, even though Ulrichsen emphasises the fact that it has travelled a long way from the archetypical monarchy. Nowadays, as shown by Hatina Christoph Schumann, liberal tendencies in Kuwait remain strong despite the difficulties in establishing them, which are reported by Brown, and the fact that the United Nations insist on the further development of democratic governance in the country, which is its policy in the Asian region in general. Kuwait seems to respond favourably to such comments as His Highness Sheikh Naser Al-Mohammad Al-Ahmad Al-Sabah tends to highlight the importance of freedoms and equality for its population, while also emphasising its agreement with the UN. It is important to note that, according to Conway, no currently existing system has managed to achieve the pure threefold separation of powers that, according to the author, exists only theoretically, and this results in both risks and benefits for citizens. Similarly, Daugherty points out that separating the judicial branch from the executive one is a necessity, but one that is not always possible, providing an example of a politically-influenced case of criminal prosecution. Therefore, the issues that are experienced by Kuwait do not indicate the impossibility of change and, in fact, signify a room for improvement. A closer consideration of the history of Kuwait and its Constitution can provide more insights on the development of democracy in the country. In turn, the development of democracy is also connected to the creation of Constitution; according to research on the topic, it was the democratic developments that enabled the drafting of the Constitution in the form in which it was eventually presented. Thus, the present section will consider the historical events that preceded and framed the drafting of Kuwaiti’s Constitutions with special remarks about the factors that affected the process and its outcome. Tetreault highlights the fact that based on the historical records, as well as mythos surrounding the early development of Kuwait, democracy has never been a foreign concept for it. Rather, it can be suggested that relative equality could be found in the country since the very beginning; at the very least, the wealthy families of Kuwait were equal, which implies the presence of oligarchy in the early days of Kuwait. The first steps toward democracy in the country were taken in ; according to the National Assembly of Kuwait, that was when the Al-Sabah Family were elected to rule the State of Kuwait. Again, the action did not involve all the people of the country, but a number of wealthy families were involved. Furthermore, the ruling family amassed power, the elite of Kuwait resisted the development of authoritarianism. Thus, the balance between the rulers of Kuwait and its oligarchs demonstrates the way the country has been resisting the idea of absolute power since the very beginning. Moreover, Tetreault insists that the Amirs’ “royalist tendencies” were “minimal” until the 1860s. Therefore, for at least a hundred years, the Amirs did not make significant attempts at achieving absolute monarchy. In addition, local parliaments of Kuwait need to be mentioned. According to the National Assembly, the “consultation principle” is deeply rooted in Kuwaiti culture. This principle describes the fact that the people of Kuwait tend to consult with each other when considering various matters of importance, and since the early years of Kuwait, it was done with the help of Dawaween. Dawaween has been defined by the National Assembly as “small local parliaments”. Thus, the idea of engaging the people in resolving major issues has also been present in Kuwait for centuries. To summarise, there exists sufficient evidence to indicate that certain limitations of the absolute power can be found in Kuwaiti history. Similarly, information can be discovered about the involvement of Kuwaiti people in significant decisions since the early days of the country. As a result, the National Assembly of Kuwait argues that democracy in Kuwait has been developing more or less since the establishment of the State of Kuwait. However, the Assembly does admit that various political events had an adverse impact on the rulers’ willingness to confer with their people and that the presented evidence points toward oligarchy rather than proper democracy. The first relatively successful attempt at creating an independent legislative power in Kuwait dates back to , when the first Shura Council, which can be described as the Consultative Council, was established. By the time, Kuwait had already entered the treaty with Britain, which occurred during the reign of Mubarak the Great in . The treaty was somewhat endangered during the First World War when Mubarak, who was initially acting in support of Britain, started assisting the Ottoman Empire, which was mostly connected to trade with the latter. However, Britain threatened to withdraw the treaty which led Shaikh Salem, who was the next Shaikh to govern Kuwait after Mubarak, to comply with British requirements. Britain then proceeded to assist Kuwait in protecting itself from the claims of other former Ottoman territories, notably Saudi Arabia and Iraq. The Shura Council was developed under the influence of a reformist movement in Kuwait, which was supported by the power of wealthy merchants and reflected the perspectives of the population of the country. Therefore, it can be suggested that the Council was a democratic element. However, it was not successful in ensuring the promotion of democracy in Kuwait because the Shaikh ignored its existence. Eventually, the council was dismissed. In its place, a new Legislative Council (Majlis) was developed, which, as stated by Adel Altabatabaie, was the first independent legislative authority in the entire Gulf region. Moreover, it was also the first elected legislative body in it as well; the National Assembly of Kuwait suggests that this development was a major step toward establishing the separation of powers in Kuwait. This Council was initiated in response to the dissident movement in Kuwait and was essentially aimed at protecting the rights of Kuwaiti people. Once again, the movement was led by powerful merchants, and they succeeded in pushing the ruler to establish the National Legislative Council in . According to the law which governed its power, the Council performed all the three power functions (executive, legislative, and judicial), and the Amir could be described as the “chief executive power” of Kuwait. The National Assembly highlights the fact that the council was elected, but it should be pointed out that the number of voters was very limited and the election required the approval of the Amir. Furthermore, the Council established a number of committees in order to efficiently monitor and address various aspects of the development of Kuwait.  The work of the Council was significantly slowed down and complicated by what could be described as a legislative vacuum: there was no constitution which would become the basis for the protection of human rights. Technically, it was because of this problem that the first Council was dissolved, and, as a result, the members of the second one received the task of rectifying the issue. The task of developing a document that would resolve the problem was given high priority, and the Council was required to create the Basic Law of the State. As pointed out by the National Assembly, the Council was busy with preparing what was essentially a Constitution, although it can be considered an early version of the document. Sheikh Ahmed Al Jaber who was ruling the country back then was initially opposed to the project but was eventually persuaded to agree by the Council. Thus, the Basic Law of Kuwait was developed in . It included a wide range of documents that ensured the coordination of the work of the three branches of power while also describing the legislation pertinent to various aspects of a country’s life, including education, economy, security, and so on. It did focus on particular groups within the population of Kuwait (in particular, merchants), which means that it probably was not capable of enabling full equality of Kuwaiti people. However, the fact that it still presupposed involving the people of Kuwait in important decisions implies that it was a step toward democracy. Furthermore, while not very extensive, the Law incorporated crucial democratic principles, including the sovereignty of the people of Kuwait. The National Assembly of Kuwait assesses the experience as highly important for the progress of democracy in the country. The document became prioritised and referred to for any external and internal matters; it was decided that it could only be changed with the Council’s approval.Due to this development, Kuwait proceeded to engage in the separation of powers, which resulted in the establishment of the country’s executive, legislative, and judiciary powers between  and . However, before proceeding to the  Constitution, it is important to consider the economic developments in the country that occurred prior to the event. When considering democracy in Kuwait after , the National Assembly highlights the impact of the discovery of oil in . The Assembly reports that a notable percentage of the funds was directed toward education, as well as the cultural development of Kuwait. In tandem, these investments resulted in the development of constitutional thought and Kuwaiti understanding of democracy. On the other hand, Tetreault and Salih note that the powerful ruling family had particular access to the oil and funds resulting from its sales, which vested them with increased power. From this perspective, the previously powerful oligarchs that used to constrain absolute monarchy became weaker. Still, Salih also points out that oil revenue was also actively invested into businesses, and this fact might have tipped the scales back: the funding of businesses promoted the wealth of businesspeople, thus creating a new oligarchy. In summary, the discovery of oil definitely had an impact on the development of the Constitution, but its effects might have been complex and diverse. This side note demonstrates that the development of democracy is connected to multiple factors, some of which are connected to the economy of the country.In , Kuwait became officially independent, and just two months later (in August ), the elections for the Constitutional Council started with the Amiri Decree No. . They resulted in the creation of the Constituent Assembly, the members of which were protected through Law No.  of , which established the parliamentary immunity necessary for the task. Since March  and until November , the Assembly would work seven days a week on drafting the Constitution, and on November , , the final version of the Constitution was approved by its members. The Assembly regulated its work based on the Article  of the Statute in the transitional period, and the document that it produced was eventually based on the principle of separation of powers, as well as the cooperation of powers. The entire Part IV of the Constitution (Articles -) is dedicated to the topic and covers the general provisions, the head of the state (Amir), and the legislative, executive, and judicial powers in that order. The National Assembly of Kuwait highlights the Constitution’s focus on the separation of power, indicating that this feature, along with the institution of the National Assembly in accordance with it, allowed it to guarantee democracy. Regarding the independence of the country, the process of acquiring it was mostly peaceful, but it involved issues with Iraq. The Kuwaiti ruler decided to make Kuwait independent, and Great Britain was similarly ready for the change, which can be attributed to the country’s resources being exhausted after the Second World War. As a result, when both countries announced Kuwait’s independence, other countries were quick to acknowledge the event and recognise the sovereignty of Kuwait. Great Britain also assisted Kuwait in developing its defences. One of the primary dangers for the newly independent country was the potential claim of the countries associated with the former Ottoman Empire, especially Iraq, which protested Kuwait’s sovereignty and threatened invasion. For example, in  and , the British Cabinet of Ministers still anticipated the possibility of Iraq attacking Kuwait. In the same year, the Amir of Kuwait requested Britain’s support formally. With Kuwait joining the Arab League and the United Nations showing interest in Kuwait, more protection was lent to the country. With British assistance and that of other Arab countries (those making up the Arab League), Iraq was mostly deterred from attacking, although an incident with Iraq seizing a reportedly “small” portion of Kuwaiti land was reported as late as in . Still, when the United Nations acknowledged Kuwait, Iraq officially surrendered its claims. In , a diplomatic meeting in Baghdad involved Iraq abandoning any claims to the country and supporting its inclusion in the Arab League and United Nations. Britain proceeded to cooperate with Kuwait after that, among other things, through establishing the Kuwait Liaison Team and its embassy in Kuwait. The Kuwait Liaison Team, as demonstrated through the responsibilities of its Head, existed predominantly for the fostering of military cooperation between the countries. However, the reduction of the influence of Britain on Kuwait, as well as the fortification of Kuwait’s own national identity and international relations, helped the progress of democracy in the country as suggested by the National Assembly of Kuwait. Thus, at the time of the development of the Constitution, it was understood that there are three branches of power, which needed to be separated, but the Constitution also implied that they were expected to cooperate. The literature that was produced shortly after the introduction of the Constitution indicates that at the time, its values were respected and promoted, including the interest in human rights, freedoms, and separation of powers, as well as the opposition to absolute power. More recent studies seem to share the same perspective, but they are particularly likely to be critical of the hindrances to democracy, which are still present in Kuwait. For example, the National Assembly of Kuwait has praised the Constitution for introducing the separation of powers and democratic principles. The body has emphasised the significance of the fact that the Constitution focused on engaging the people of Kuwait in politics and required establishing an equilibrium between the three branches of power. However, the Assembly also commented on the crises of democratic practices, highlighting the significance of upholding democracy with the help of the Constitution. Thus, the values of separation of powers and democracy appear to have been preserved. At the time of its adoption, the Constitution appeared to be revolutionary for Kuwait because, despite the previous attempts to limit the Amir’s power, no success in this respect was achieved for a sufficiently prolonged time. However, the Constitution effectively transformed the country into a constitutional monarchy, significantly limiting the power of the Ruler in a legal way. The Constitution, which was ratified by in , came into force in January , as was required by its Article  that established the time limits for the procedure. The ratification was carried out by Sheikh Abdullah Al-Salem on November , . There have been attempts at modifying the Constitution. For example, as pointed out by Al-Moqatei, Article  became controversial. In it, the Constitution states that the “religion of the State is Islam and Islamic Law shall be a main source of legislation”. The phrasing led to prolonged discussions, in which the people of Kuwait considered the implications of using the Islamic Law as “a main source of legislation”. It has been proposed to change the article to state that the Islamic Law was supposed to be the “only source of legislation”; Al-Moqatei states that a large part of the population of Kuwait supported the idea at the time of its proposal. However, the author also reports the alternative opinion, according to which such an amendment would prevent Kuwait from using any other sources of the law, which could be detrimental in the long run. In the end, the article was not amended. The Constitution of  remains valid to this day. The history of its development demonstrates the way in which the political, economic, and sociocultural factors that were at play in Kuwait prior to, during, and after its creation resulted in this outcome. Unlike the previous section, this one is based on very credible sources, which were relatively easy to find. Most of them are books or academic papers that are typically peer-reviewed. Additionally, an examination of the Constitution was facilitated by the free access to the primary source,  and the literature that analyses Kuwaiti Constitution is not too scarce either. A few of the sources were also created at the time when the Constitution was only recently approved, which makes them especially valuable; they can report on the then-present questions and concerns related to the topic. There are also no direct contradictions in the literature due to it being predominantly dedicated to historical accounts. However, the triangulation of sources, which typically report similar conclusions, implies that the likelihood of this literature review reporting high-quality findings is increased. Thus, unlike the previous section, this one does not experience the issue of being based on scarce sources. Regarding the more recent events in Kuwaiti history, several important milestones should be noted. The National Assembly was suspended in , recalled again in , and suspended again in ; according to Casey, this “turmoil” was “a direct reflection of the ability of the political opposition to get elected and thereby influence Kuwait’s internal affairs”. Additionally, the ruling family experienced the pressure of other Arab countries, especially Saudi Arabia, the ruler of which was worried about the progress of democracy in Kuwait because it could instil similar ideas in Saudis. However, the growth of threat from Iran had the opposite effect and prompted the Amir to legitimise his rule by focusing on human rights once again. In , Iraq invaded and occupied Kuwait with the claims that the territory, which once belonged to the Ottoman Empire, was to be transferred to Iraq. To be more specific, Iraq claimed that while being a part of the Ottoman Empire, Kuwait belonged to the same authority as Iraq. From the perspective of Iraq, the agreement between Kuwait and Great Britain in  was invalid because the Sheikh of Kuwait did not have the authority to enter it. Kuwait’s status as a subordinate unit was also mentioned in the Anglo-Ottoman Convention of . However, the same Convention also determined the fact that Kuwait was separate from Iraq and established the borders between the two countries, and in addition to that, it was never actually formally ratified. The  acknowledgement of Kuwait by Iraq’s Prime Minister was dismissed by Iraq with the claim that said minister was a British “puppet”. Casey also notes that no such claims were made about the  meeting, which involved Iraq abandoning any claims to Kuwait or its territory. Overall, Casey points out that the invasion was justified by the aspects of Kuwait’s and Iraq’s history that served Iraq, and the country neglected the facts that could diminish its claims. Additionally, Iraqi leaders insisted that they acted in support of a Kuwaiti uprising against the Ruler, even though no actual uprising was present at the time. Casey suggests that the reason for the invasion was the Kuwaiti oil. The aggression prompted an international response, especially after the petition of the Kuwaiti government to the United Nations. In , a US-led bombing forced Iraqi out of Kuwait, but in the process, it caused massive destruction. The post-war devastation led the Amir to introduce Martial Law and work to ensure the national security. In general, the war did not have a positive effect on democracy in Kuwait. However, the pressure from the population and international organisations pushed the Amir to re-elect the National Assembly in . Since then, the National Assembly was suspended once more in , and dissolved in , , , and . Other than that, no major adverse events in the field were noted. Positive developments included the expansion of human rights, especially women’s rights. Apart from that, the topic of the Arab Spring appears to be of importance. The term “Arab Spring” has been used to describe a series of protests and revolutions that occurred in Arab countries. It started in  with the rebellion in Tunisia and proceeded to concern multiple countries of the Middle East and North Africa region. According to recent research, the conflicts were predominantly motivated by governance issues (especially by the demands for democracy), as well as some economic concerns (like unemployment). The results varied for different countries, and they were not always positive. For instance, in Syria, the situation devolved in chaos and humanitarian catastrophe because of the lack of compromise between the fighting parties, but in Yemen, it resulted in the ousting of its President. While no revolutions occurred in Kuwait, it would appear that the events caused Kuwaiti people to protest in demand for reforms. In particular, “youth movements and grassroots opposition” were inspired by the Arab Spring, and the push for reforms appeared to have increased and expressed itself in demonstrations and protests, including licenced and unlicensed ones. Apart from that, in , Kuwait experienced a “political upheaval” which was connected to “the Prime Minister’s abuse of public funds” and him being supported by the Amir. The information about this corruption was disseminated through mass media, which resulted in demonstrations aimed at the Minister’s resignation, as well as Twitter posts, which openly criticised the Prime Minister and the Amir. Such posts became the reason for prosecution in Kuwait; for instance, after a  post, Fatima Al Matar was prosecuted in . The post involved a discussion of corruption, and it became very popular. The specific offences that the woman was prosecuted for included that described by Article  of Law / and Article  of Law /. The first of them states that publishing “news, information, statistics or rumours about the political, economic, financial or social situation with the intention of eroding the state’s status and prominence” outside of Kuwait is a crime. The second specifies the punishment for “shouting or writing or drawing or picturing or any other means of thought expression, the rights and authority of the Prince, or reproach the Prince person or violate the princedom attribute”. Thus, while the prosecution did not use the term “political crime” since the category does not exist in Kuwait, the content of the Articles appears to imply that the crime would be political in nature as it would be concerned with the government and its security. Fatima Al Matar’s post was perceived as disrespectful by many witnesses, which may explain the application of the cited legislation. However, this fact indicates that the laws are open to interpretation, that the political movement for change in Kuwait received some resistance and that the freedom of speech in the country may encounter some obstacles. Some other troubling tendencies have been noted. In particular, human rights activists state that after the Arab Spring, the freedom of expression in Kuwait appears to have been decreasing. The specific examples of such tendencies include the increase in the prosecution for “blasphemy” and defamation of the ruling family. Such approaches have been particularly damaging for online media freedom. Also, while protests are not prohibited by the law and are, in fact, guaranteed by the Constitution, there have been reports of at least  people prosecuted for participating in such events with charges related to defamation and other crimes similar to the ones described above. The Human Rights Council points out that Kuwaiti legislation allows prohibiting peaceful demonstrations and protests, as well as using force to disperse them, which is classified as a threat to the freedoms of expression and assembly. This section consists of high-quality sources that predominantly record historical events, and their mutual triangulation implies that the presented information is most likely factual and correct. The current criminal justice system of Kuwait is based on contrasting principles of British jurisdiction (as a past influence) as well as French, Egyptian and Islamic law (that can be described as continuing influences). As pointed out by Liebesny, this feature makes the criminal justice system in Kuwait rather unique in its diffusion and dependence on several different patterns, including the reference to civil codes and Islamic views. Farran, Gallen, and Rautenbach offer a collection of chapters that are devoted to different cases of law diffusion. One of them is Williamson’s work, which refers to Kuwait and considers the way that a variety of legal concepts are diffused within its legal system. The author also points out that scholars do not tend to have a unanimous opinion concerning the classification of the Kuwaiti legal system, which is common for the subject but which results in very different appraisals of the share and influence of different sources of Kuwaiti law. The author mentions that some scholars, for example, Palmer, choose to highlight civil and Islamic law while, for example, the Central Intelligence Agency, which also devotes reports to the topic, emphasises common and French civil law. According to Williamson, the country’s history (in particular since colonisation and the restoration of independence) is responsible for the process of diffusion, and this process may explain “the discrepancies between these classifications”. The present section will consider all the pertinent influences that have had a major impact on Kuwaiti law. Hybrid is a phenomenon that is in-between two other phenomena or can be characterised as both of them, and in the case of law, hybridisation is described as the process of law gaining hybridity. In the present thesis, this hybridity is considered from the perspective of legislation adopting features, elements, and ideas from other legislation. This concept incorporates both international and internal hybridisation. An illustration of the former is the way international documents can affect a country’s legislation: prompt a country to prohibit torture, for instance. The examples of the latter can include the way the naturalisation decree in  in Kuwait redefined the concept of Kuwaiti citizenship, immigration legislation, and, by extension, the future Constitution. As pointed out by Sand, the “law is producing and stabilizing legal norms in an increasingly highly specialized, complex and continuously changing society,” which naturally requires changes in the law or causes them. For instance, according to Choudhry, law hybridisation tends to enhance human rights protection, but the author also suggests that the increased attention to terrorism, especially after the /, may have pushed the law towards emphasising security rather than human rights. The processes which are associated with hybridisation are multiple. For example, legislation can acquire the features of a soft law (de-formalisation), which is particularly likely to occur in the areas that are significant from the international perspective. In general, international legislation is especially prone to hybridisation. Finke provides the example of financial regulation, which, when considered at the global level, is more likely to be popular with states when it is soft (not actually legally binding). The author states that international soft laws can also affect states, and he focuses on the way the international monetary law is hybridised under the demand for softer laws, as well as the changes in international agreements. Other terms have also been employed in the field to communicate similar meanings. For instance, Choudhry considers the term “migration,” indicating that various ideas (the author focuses on Constitutional ones) tend to migrate from one legal system to another one. Other versions are “transplantation” and “borrowing,” which are less neutral since they make inferences about the intent of the people performing the operation. Furthermore, the term “diffusion” can be used to describe the process of spreading ideas. As for hybridisation, according to Sand, the primary value of the concept is that it helps to describe and explain the “highly differentiated yet closely linked” legal phenomena” and allows an observer to note particular elements, features, and the specifics of development of a law. As a result, the present thesis predominantly uses the term “hybridisation” because it is capable of attracting the attention to the origins of the different features of the unique Kuwaiti system. Williamson reports that Kuwait used to be under the influence of the British jurisdiction since  and until the country became independent in . Technically, however, Kuwait was not colonised by Great Britain. The history of the relationships between the two countries is long and complex; for example, Hakima and Al-Saleh report that their first contact dates back to  when the British mail route was altered to accommodate the problem of the Persian attack on Basra and started to involve Kuwait. As a result, the East India Company moved to Kuwait. Furthermore, in , the two countries entered an Anglo-Kuwaiti Treaty. The primary feature of this treaty was that it was a protection treaty; in it, it was specified that Great Britain would provide protection but would not interfere with the internal affairs of Kuwait. That still meant that the foreign affairs of Kuwait were impacted very much by Britain, however. Basically, according to the Cabinet of Ministers, “the United Kingdom Government was responsible for the external affairs of Kuwait” at the time, and the situation did not change much until Kuwait proclaimed its independence. In the  agreement between Mubarak and Britain, it was determined that only the British government would be allowed to establish offices in Kuwait. In June of that year, the first political attaché was appointed by the British government in Kuwait; it was Captain A. S. G. Knox. These documents determined the nature of the relations between Kuwait and Britain for decades to come. As seen from the materials that described the events at the time, the decision to enter the treaty with Britain was made by Mubarak mostly to avoid the threat of the Ottoman Empire which was continually working to undermine Kuwaiti independence. Effectively, Kuwait was a part of the Ottoman Empire, but it made an effort to maintain factual independence. In general, according to Adel Altabatabaie, Sheikh Mubarak who was the Amir at the time used the treaty to protect his power. Furthermore, Altabatabaie suggests that Britain was interested in the treaty because the region, which experienced rather significant conflicts at the time, was crucial for its trade with India. This idea is also supported by Hakima. In other words, Britain attempted to improve its control over the region and prevent other countries from taking it. As shown by Altabatabaie, other countries were indeed interested in Kuwait for different reasons; for example, Germany was attempting to establish a port in Kuwait, and Russia tried to gain access to the Gulf and build a coal port in the country. Furthermore, Russia was interested in building a railroad from Tripoli to Kuwait, and France was willing to take part in the project and finance it. The Anglo-Kuwaiti Treaty enabled Sheikh Mubarak to refuse Germany’s requests. The Treaty specified that Britain could not interfere with the internal affairs of Kuwait, even though certain attempts to do so were present. For instance, Trenchard Fowle, who was a Political Resident in the Persian Gulf, advised Shaikh Aḥmad al-Jābir Āl Ṣabāḥ to yield to the demands of the Kuwaiti dissident movement who wanted to form a council (majlis) aimed at the protection of the rights of Kuwaiti people. However, when the council was formed in , it proved to be too dangerous for British interests, and Britain supported the Shaikh’s decision to dissolve it. Furthermore, British Ministers reported that Britain tried to discourage the Amir from joining the Arab League; this attempt was not successful.  In general, advice and support should not be viewed as direct intervention. Therefore, the treaty did not turn Kuwait into a colony; Altabatabaie compares the relationships between Kuwait and Britain to those of Tunisia and France as the results of similar protection agreements. Great Britain had entered such treaties with multiple other countries, including, for example, Bahrain. As pointed out by Gillespie, such alliances affected the external politics of the Gulf states, but they were intended to have no consequences for their internal affairs, including positive ones. This approach can be contrasted to the way British colonies were typically affected by the British rule. For instance, in Burma, the British influence was more notable in different aspects of its life, including the judiciary, which was predominantly comprised of European or Anglo-Burmese officials until Burma’s independence. The differences between British colonies and the countries that entered a treaty with Britain imply that it would be helpful to compare Kuwait to the latter. For instance, the similarities and differences in the history of Bahrain and Kuwait can be used to consider and contrast their progress towards democracy. The primary reason for the choice of Bahrain and Kuwait is the similarities in their past and present history, as well as the fact that both are constitutional monarchies, which is important since it allows reviewing the countries with comparable outcomes of their development. It is noteworthy that the level of democracy in Bahrain is considered to be lower than that in Kuwait based on the data of the Freedom House. For instance, in both countries, there is a constitution, a king (Bahrain) or Amir (Kuwait), a cabinet of ministers appointed by the king or Amir, and a National Assembly elected by the people. However, in Bahrain, the ministers constitute half of the government, and in Kuwait, ministers can only take up one-third of it, providing more power for the representatives of the people. Thus, the two countries that share similar history have moved in the same direction (towards complete independence and democracy), but Kuwait has moved further. It has been suggested by authors, including Elliot and Atanassow, that the activities of colonising countries could have been either beneficial or harmful for the development of democracy in a country. Possibly, the lack of direct colonisation and the presence of only treaties reduced the potential negative impacts of outside influence on Kuwaiti democratic growth. Between  and , in Kuwait, the British jurisdiction operated separately from the National one; Britain achieved similar outcomes throughout the Gulf with the help of its Foreign Jurisdiction Acts. In other words, between  and , the country had two separate and very different Jurisdictions, the latter of which applied to predominantly to Kuwaiti citizens while the former was applicable to other groups, mostly British, Americans, Greeks, and some others. According to the literature of the time, the National Jurisdiction was “relatively semitribal” and had “no written laws, no procedure and no defined courts” with the exception of the “personal status matters, which were and still are governed by Islamic law”. Hijazi reports that the British jurisdiction was based on English legal principles and mirrored the procedures and court functions of England. The two systems worked together for mixed cases, which referred to the events when the people involved in one case belonged to different jurisdictions. Specific rules existed for such occurrences. Despite the established procedures, the existence of two different jurisdictions led to problems and confusion. According to Allday,the British jurisdiction was also the dominant one, which was illustrated by the case of the Cat Meat Crisis of . The latter involved a non-Kuwaiti restaurant owner who was accused of selling cat meat. He was initially detained by the local authorities, but as a foreigner, he was transferred to the British Agency. The evidence of the alleged crime was dismissed, and the charges were dropped almost immediately, which, according to Allday, demonstrates the way the British jurisdiction “infringed on the country’s sovereignty” and proves “Britain’s dominant position in Kuwait” at the time. However, Woodward also points out that the British Government worked to consider the power balance in the region with respect to the judicial aspects of its presence in the Gulf. Joyce reports that given the advantages of a system with written laws and defined procedures, the British jurisdiction became popular in Kuwait, but consequently, it was also attacked by the nationalists because it was symbolic of potentially colonialist issues. Again, Kuwait was not a colony; it was a party in a treaty with Great Britain, but at the time, the presence of the British jurisdiction in Kuwait caused unease, especially among the nationalists. It is noteworthy that Britain did not attempt to stifle the nationalist movement in Kuwait until it felt that its interests were threatened. Eventually, in , it was established that the British jurisdiction in Kuwait would be repealed after a new working system would have been implemented, and in , the British Parliament officially fulfilled that promise. The British jurisprudence legacy is multidimensional. According to Professor Abdullah Alnafisi, who is a former Parliament member of Kuwait, the influence of British specialists like John Richmond, George Middleton, and Edward Heath illustrates that legacy. In particular, the named figures prompted the Amir to pursue democratic principles and freedom of the press. On the other hand, Salameh and Al-Sharah point out that there have been cases in which Britain hindered the development of separation of powers and democracy, for example, by ensuring the dissolution of the first Shura Council in Kuwait. The Jurisdiction that was developed for Kuwait in the years following the decision to repeal British jurisdiction was not based on the principles of the latter, which limits its impact on Kuwaiti legislation. However, as pointed out by Joyce, it can be argued that the reason for choosing non-British legislation for Kuwaiti laws might be connected to colonialism and subsequent rejection of British jurisdiction. Thus, the choice of non-British legislation for Kuwait may have been the result of its presence in the country, which indicates that British jurisdiction is an important influence on Kuwaiti laws. It is noteworthy that a similar event occurred in Bahrain: it had to adopt the British approach to legislation (specifically, its common law) until the country’s independence in . After its independence, the country proceeded to “Arabize” its law, which involved using the legislation employed by the Arab League. The latter was influenced by the Egyptian and French civil law. Thus, both Kuwait and Bahrain ended up rejecting the British common law after proclaiming their independence. There are some general differences between English and French law from the perspective of criminal justice. As a common law system, England uses the adversarial system of legal procedure, and France, being a civil law country, uses the inquisitorial one. Also, the countries have different penal codes and related procedures. In France, the penal code focuses on the seriousness of the crimes, and they are termed accordingly “from serious felonies, to less serious felonies and misdemeanours,” to violations. In England, there is no “unified penal code; rather, the criminal law is a combination of statutes and Common Law practice”. Also, the classification of the English law crimes is typically concerned with arrestability: there are arrestable and non-arrestable (or summary) offences. Arrestable and “serious” non-arrestable offences are brought to higher courts with a jury; non-arrestable offences that are not considered serious do not require a jury trial. All these differences are of interest in Kuwait studies because the Kuwaiti legal system was under the influence of the British jurisdiction but eventually based its law on the French one. Indeed, the French law has served as an inspiration for the codified law of Kuwait in the majority of areas that do not cover personal status or financial matters (in particular, banking and tax legislation), which are governed by Islamic law. However, this outcome was achieved indirectly: the legal system of Kuwait that was developed to supplant the British system was based on the Egyptian law, and the latter, as reported by Williamson, is noticeably inspired by the French law. Therefore, some effect of the French law on Kuwaiti legislation can be noted, but due to its secondary nature, the influence of the Egyptian legislation can be considered more pronounced. Other influences have also been noted; for example, Huneidi states that the Kuwaiti Law of Commerce was created with the help of Iraqi law, which is also based on French legal principles. In turn, a major source of the French law is the Roman law, which is associated with the prioritisation of functional codification. Thus, the French law has influenced the Kuwaiti law indirectly through multiple sources while also bringing its own sources to have an impact as well. According to Williamson, French law tends to be viewed as relatively less flexible than the British jurisdiction. For example, the author notes certain French law-related drawbacks that can affect economic development. In particular, the British jurisdiction is considered to be more business-friendly (providing “more adequate institutions for financial markets”) and implies less governmental interventions than the French law. Williamson concedes that this idea is supported by limited evidence and can be contested, but the author also suggests that the Kuwaiti legal system might have inherited the issues related to the French law. The author exemplifies this statement using the comments of the Oxford Business Group regarding the restrictive legislation in Kuwait that may result in challenges for the economic development of the country. Admittedly, the report mentions some information about restrictive legislation, for example, that pertinent to insurance. However, it also highlights some achievements in the field, including the movement of the tax legislation towards a more liberal one. Therefore, it is difficult to assess the impact of French law on Kuwaiti legislation, but it is clearly present. Egyptian law was particularly important for the development of the Kuwaiti legislation because the working system that was meant to supplant the British jurisdiction in Kuwait was based on it. Indeed, Williamson reports that Dr Abdel-Razzaq al-Sanhouri (a famous and accomplished specialist from Egypt) was invited to develop the new Kuwaiti legislation, and since he was Egyptian, he used the Egyptian legal system for inspiration. Thus, according to Williamson, the Egyptian Law assisted in the development of the codified Kuwaiti law in the non-personal status matters along with the French Law. The Kuwaiti Civil Code was enacted in . It incorporates the general rules of Kuwaiti law; the more specific cases (for example, commercial transactions) are regulated by specific laws (for example, Commercial Code). According to Hijazi, the new system developed by Dr al-Sanhouri was based on non-Kuwaiti legislation rather heavily and was also implemented in a very short time, which is why it was not assimilated easily and is sometimes described as unnecessarily complicated and cumbersome, as well as inflexible. Williamson suggests that such a conclusion is largely warranted and uses the example of the ease of conducting business in the country to demonstrate that the process is more complicated in Kuwait than in New Zealand. The lack of judges and lawyers in Kuwait, which, at the time, was related to the dominance of the British jurisdiction and the changes in the legal system of the country, was resolved by attracting Egyptian specialists, which is a decision that must have been necessary at the time, but which also required a different long-term solution. In , for example, over % of civil service workers were expatriates, and for the Ministry of Justice, the figure was %; the judges were predominantly non-Kuwaiti, and this reliance on the immigrant workforce was viewed as a problem. The picture has changed; for instance, in , only % of the workers of the Ministry of Justice were expatriates, even though the expatriate population in Kuwait still accounts for almost %. Thus, the development of the new system was not very smooth, but relevant solutions can be offered. As mentioned by Al-Moqatei, Islamic law (Shari’a) dominated Kuwait until the middle of the previous century. In fact, according to the author, in the 1930s, the people of Kuwait petitioned for the introduction of a Shari’a-based political system. Williamson suggests that the influence of the Muslim jurisprudence on modern Kuwait is notable; in fact, it is explicitly stated in Article  of the Constitution that the Islamic Shari’a is supposed to be a primary source of Kuwaiti legislation. However, according to Williamson, Islamic Shari’a is a major but not the main source of Kuwaiti legislation; the author points out that it is used predominantly for personal-status matters and financial services (Islamic banking is very well-developed in the country). In the end, Williamson states that the result of the law diffusion in Kuwait is a combination of Muslim law and French-Egyptian-based civil law. In summary, the diffusion of law in Kuwait is the result of its history, the investigation of which can help to pinpoint and comprehend some of the challenges faced by the system nowadays. Kuwait is a part of multiple international treaties and organisations, which have affected its criminal justice system. For example, it is a member of the United Nations, and it is also a member of a variety of affiliated entities, including, for instance, the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization or the United Nations Development Programme, which is reported to have particular influence in the country. Regarding the relevant treaties, Kuwait has signed a number of them, including those that are related to security concerns (the Nuclear Terrorism Convention, Terrorist Financing Convention, and United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime). Furthermore, many international documents that were ratified by Kuwait are directly focused on human rights or incorporate related considerations; they include the Charter of the United Nations, the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women, the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination, the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, the Convention on the Rights of the Child, the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, and Convention against Torture. Additionally, Kuwait is also subject to the resolutions by certain bodies of the UN, but not all of such documents are as binding as treaties, which means that some of them can be soft law obligations. It should be noted that Kuwait has also ratified optional protocols on children in armed conflicts and child prostitution and pornography in , although other optional protocols were not ratified. In addition, no data about accepted individual complaints or inquiry procedures are available. Regarding the more regional obligations, Kuwait is a member of the Gulf Cooperation Council, the League of Arab States, and the Organization of Islamic Cooperation. These organisations have their own treaties; for instance, there is an anti-terrorism treaty in the Gulf Cooperation Council, as well as related resolutions. Also, Kuwait actively works with the League of Arab States to combat terrorism; for instance, in , the Summit of the League was hosted in the country, and it was aimed at developing an anti-terrorist strategy for the Arab world. Finally, there are bilateral treaties and agreements. For example, Egypt and Kuwait signed several agreements recently, including two implementation programs for cooperation in the fields of culture, technology, and tourism. In summary, Kuwait is subject to multiple binding and non-binding international obligations. The mentioned treaties have affected (hybridised) the country’s law because Kuwaiti treaties, as stated by the Constitution (Article ), gain the “force of law” after their “ratification, sanction and publication in the Official Gazette”. For instance, the Convention against Torture is connected to the National Security Law No. /, which criminalises torture. The legal education in Kuwait also incorporates international law courses. The Kuwaiti human rights institution (Diwan Huquq al-Insan) is being brought to a state in which it will correspond to international principles, especially in terms of independence. Thus, Kuwait’s criminal justice system has been impacted by the international influences. A detailed discussion of the independence of the judiciary and related international standards has been introduced by Sujit Choudhry,  and their basic description is provided by the UN. They include the following requirements. First, judicial appointments must not be controlled by the executive power, and it is preferable that the process involves multiple actors, including, for example, opposition parties and civil society. Secondly, it is preferable to keep the tenure, as well as other terms of service, especially remuneration, for judicial appointees as secure as possible (in the best-case scenario, they need to be legislated and set with no unfavourable reductions). Thirdly, accountability is important; misconduct and incompetence should still be punishable for judges. Moreover, any sort of allocation, transfers and reassignments for judicial appointees should be resolved internally, and any sort of administrative management within the judiciary should also remain internal. In terms of courts, they must all be established by the law and well-funded, preferably with the judiciary being responsible for the funding. Overall, the standards imply the need to remove any sort of potential external influences on the judiciary, which, indeed, should create an independent judiciary. According to the UN, there are concerns regarding some of these criteria in Kuwait, including the independence of the judiciary in terms of appointment, promotion, and disciplinary action, as well as the problem of the security of tenure for non-Kuwaiti judges. Similarly, the International Association of Democratic Lawyers highlights the need for advancing the fairness of trials by ensuring the independence of judges and prosecutors through a revision of the current approaches to their appointment and disciplining and a reduction of the power of the executive branch over the judiciary. Additionally, the association reported the problems of bribery and issues with irregular remuneration. The UN calls for the improvement of the situation as well. Thus, the current state of the independence of the judiciary in Kuwait might not be fully in line with the international standards, which is why the latter can serve as a guide for improvement. The presented section provided an account of predominantly historical events with some analysis of their impact, as well as a consideration of the factually existing elements of Kuwaiti legislation, which facilitated the choice of the relevant literature. The research involved mostly books and academic articles; additionally, some justified introductions of the reports of human rights organizations were performed. Thus, the United Nations is viewed as a very credible organization, which is why its conclusions were incorporated without much criticism. Furthermore, since a section on the international obligations of Kuwait was added, it made sense to include the primary sources of international organisations that documented such obligations. Overall, the usage of primary sources also assisted with the search for information. The similarities in the reported information can be considered a significant proof of the quality of the presented data. As a result, this section did not have problems with involving credible research, and the analysis is based on predominantly academic sources, primary sources, as well as the accounts of human rights organisations, which lends legitimacy to the resulting findings. The Kuwaiti Constitution is the guarantor of democracy in the country, which can be proven with the help of Article , which states that the country’s governmental system is democratic. In other words, the primary source proves the statement. The rights of the population of Kuwait are proclaimed by Articles -, which includes rights to privacy, freedom, trade unions, freedom of religion, expression, opinion and press, and so on. Also, the freedom from torture and the principle of no “punishment without law” are included in the Constitution. Apart from that, the citizen’s equality is directly stated in the Constitution’s preamble and supported by Article , which is concerned with equal opportunities, and Article , which specifically points out the equality of the people of Kuwait “in the eyes of the Law”. In summary, the Kuwaiti Constitution guarantees human rights, democracy, and citizen equality at least formally. The primary source of the Kuwaiti Constitution does not leave room for doubt that Constitutional Amendments can and should be made as necessary. The Constitution Amendment procedures were defined within the Constitution itself. Article  specifies that amendments, which include the alteration, deletion, and introduction of the constitutional provisions, can be proposed by the “Amir and one third of the National Assembly”. The proposed change is termed “Bill,” and if it is agreed upon by the majority of the Assembly, it is to be debated by the Assembly. After the debates, if it is agreed upon by two-thirds of the Assembly and the Amir sanctions and promulgates it, the Bill comes into force. A rejected Bill can be reintroduced after one year since its rejection. Also, there are certain exceptions. For instance, Articles  and , which are dedicated to the procedures of approving, initiating, and vetoing general legislation, can never be amended. Similarly, Article  also states that “the principles of liberty and equality” cannot be amended unless the proposed Bill intends to improve the country’s “guarantees of liberty and equality”. Recent sources, including academic ones and those related to human rights organisations, demonstrate that nowadays, there is a pressure for constitutional reforms. With the spread of education and mass media, the people of Kuwait are becoming more politically aware and have an advanced understanding of “the concepts of democracy, citizenship, and human rights,” becoming a political power that can press the government to reforms. The educated population of Kuwait has a history of affecting reforms, which implies that it is a major power for change. Additionally, Salameh and Al-sharah recognise the importance of the Assembly for reforms, although they also note that it has been reluctant to promote certain changes, including, for instance, those related to women’s rights. Gender equality is established by the Constitution, and, nowadays, a number of achievements in the field of protecting women’s rights can be noted, but there are still areas that require improvements. For example, the laws that regulate inheritance, marriage, and divorce are discriminatory, and there is no legislation that would specifically focus on domestic abuse. Moreover, women’s testimony in courts is treated in a discriminatory fashion, and nationality is not passed to children from their mothers.The issue may be connected to the underrepresentation of women in the three branches of power, including the judiciary. Thus, it is apparent that from this perspective, an improved protection of human rights in Kuwait is required; the Human Rights Committee is calling for legislative changes that would reduce gender-based discrimination in the country and enhance women’s representation in politics, as well as public life. When considering the civil society and its potential, it should be mentioned that there are no official political parties in the country because there is no legislation on political parties. There are some political groups, especially liberal ones, as well as Islamic and tribal ones, but the absence of appropriate legislation weakens the civil society. Apart from that, the role of non-governmental organisations (NGOs) in pushing for reforms should be considered. NGOs are a crucial tool for the mobilisation of civil efforts in the promotion of human rights. However, in Kuwait, their activity is complicated by certain issues. The licencing and registration of such organisations is under the governmental control; without appropriate licensing, they will be unable to operate legally. There are additional restrictions that prevent organisations from being actively engaged in political or religious advocacy; some limitations related to fundraising may also be applied. Furthermore, licencing is required for demonstrations, and foreigners are not allowed to participate in the latter. The government of Kuwait does cooperate with international and local human rights NGOs, but this cooperation is limited. Additionally, the government issues specific permissions for NGO representatives to enable them to attend international conferences. This position of the government may be problematic from the perspective of the human right to peaceful assembly, even though the government explains it by the need to protect the public order. However, the Constitution establishes that public assemblies “are permitted in accordance with the conditions and the stipulations defined by Law,” which implies that the government’s actions are not unconstitutional. The situation allows power abuse, and some adverse events have already occurred. For instance, it has been reported that the chapter of Transparency International in Kuwait was effectively dismantled in  through the governmental decision to replace its board of directors with the new directors who decided to eliminate the organisation’s assets. There are reports of certain types of NGOs not being registered or being prosecuted; it is typically related to the organisations that are atheist or secularist. Also, human rights activists state that they are being harassed, arrested, and detained, which has apparently been justified by the defamation of the judiciary or the ruling family. The legislation against blasphemy may have been employed to a similar end. The use of excessive governmental violence was also reported to be applied to multiple demonstrations, including the one in April . Finally, it should be noted that there is also no provision in the Constitution that would stipulate the development of political parties. According to Salameh and Al-sharah, in their absence, it is difficult to claim that the civil society of Kuwait can be strong. The Human Rights Committee calls for legislative changes that would facilitate freedom of association and expression. This problem can be used to expand on this paper’s comparison between Bahrain and Kuwait because the two countries are similar in this regard. For instance, the governments of both Bahrain and Kuwait choose to control NGOs, as well as demonstrations, through the requirement to obtain permissions. However, the Freedom House reports that in Bahrain, the rules are notably more complex than in Kuwait, which provides the government of the country with more options for denying NGOs the opportunity to operate. In addition, while the freedom of media is somewhat limited in Kuwait (mostly through the above-mentioned legislation related to insults), in Bahrain, the media are technically controlled by the government since the latter owns them. In other words, the freedom of NGOs in both countries is rather limited, but in Kuwait, they are awarded greater freedom. Indeed, despite the mentioned issues, there are some major NGOs in the country, and their role is notable. The Kuwait Society for Human Rights intends to promote and protect human rights in the country and apply international standards to its context. The Women’s Cultural and Social Society is the first Kuwaiti organisation that targeted women’s rights, and since its establishment in , it has been promoting them. Organisations like the Human Rights Watch are allowed to visit Kuwait and conduct their research there. It may also be important to mention the National Assembly’s Human Rights Committee; reportedly, it operates independently from the government, but since it is a committee of the National Assembly, it cannot be viewed as an NGO. Regarding the NGOs that are specifically related to criminal justice, the following examples can be offered. The Penal Reform International is developing projects relevant to the protection of human rights for imprisoned people and other stakeholders of the criminal justice system in coordination with Kuwaiti government, as well as with those of the Middle East in general. Also, the Kuwait Bar Association is an organisation of Kuwaiti legal specialists, which the government currently intends to engage in reform development. Thus, criminal justice NGOs are also present in Kuwait. The activity of the mentioned societies has yielded some positive outcomes. For instance, they have contributed to the promotion and protection of women’s rights, including the advocacy of their employment as judges. Recently, women received the right to become prosecutors in Kuwait, which means that they will have the chance to become judges as well. Therefore, NGOs are one of the powers in Kuwait that can promote change and reforms despite the difficulties that they encounter. It should also be mentioned that there are trade unions in Kuwait, even though they are limited in number. An example is the Lawyer’s Union. It is also important that noncitizen migrants cannot enter such unions, which leaves them under-protected. At the same time, there are some reports of migrant workers being mistreated and underpaid by employers, which is illegal. Currently, expatriates constitute about % of the population of the country as reported by the Public Authority for Civil Information. Also, their number amounts to at least  million people. The situation with large numbers of expatriates is not a new one for Kuwait. The country has been experiencing it since the middle of the previous century, and the government viewed it as an issue; relevant solutions have been introduced since . Nowadays, “Kuwaitization” is the key solution that is used. The term refers to the political agenda of supporting and increasing the percentage of Kuwaiti workers in various positions in Kuwait. The outcome is achieved by investing in the development of native human resources; after all, one of the reasons for the employment of expatriates is the lack of trained Kuwaiti workforce. A little fewer than  Kuwaiti students study abroad; mostly, they favour the US, UK, and Jordan, as well as Australia and the countries of the Gulf. Also, the number of Kuwaiti students who are willing to study abroad has been growing; for instance, between  and , the number of Kuwaiti students in the US has increased by almost %. The Kuwaitization efforts yield some results. For instance, in , the civil service employees were predominantly expatriates with only % of Kuwaiti people working in the field. However, in , at least  governmental departments had over % of Kuwaiti employees. However, for the private sector, the employment of Kuwaiti remains rather low. In any case, the number of expatriates in Kuwait indicates a need for their extensive protection, but the above-presented information indicates that this need is not satisfied. A note should be made on the sources employed in this section of the paper. A few academic sources have been employed, as well as the primary source of the Constitution, but predominantly, the section relied on the reports of human rights organisations and news reports. They can be considered a form of reliable sources, but they tend to produce materials that have little to no explanation of methodology. Much of the cited literature is sourced, but some of it is not. As a result, the question of the quality of the existing evidence can be raised. However, the triangulation of sources demonstrates that they do not contradict each other, which implies that the presented findings are not unlikely to be accurate. Given the specifics of the discussed topic, the employment of the reports of human rights organisations, which are often NGOs, appears appropriate. The Police as the Law Enforcement Body and Divisions within the Ministry of Interior Within the Ministry of Interior, which is responsible for enforcing the law, the Directorate of Police and Public Security represents the law enforcement body, as stated by Burdett and Crystal. Its divisions include those working with criminal investigation, civil defence, traffic, immigration, and so on, which corresponds to the typical activities performed by a law enforcement agency described by Travis and Edwards. Two of these sources are rather outdated, but they are trustworthy, and the similarities between them assist with developing reliable findings on their basis. There are some problems related to Kuwaiti police that can be found in the literature. The recent report on Kuwaiti criminal justice suggests that there is no effective separation of powers with respect to investigative power when police and prosecutors are concerned. Apart from that, Crystal states that the Ministry of Interior demonstrates a lack of control over the national police, its sub-divisions, and the National Guard in relation to investigations and guaranteeing public security. This is the result of the existence of a rather complicated net of agencies that are responsible for internal security, which leads to their responsibilities overlapping. Consequently, citizens’ rights can be violated when individuals are unfairly imprisoned or held in police offices for more than four days without prosecution. As pointed out by Ashworth and Horder and other authors, a criminal justice system must respect human rights and freedoms, but the inefficiency of the system can pose a threat to them. Naturally, the Penal Code of Kuwait contains Article , which states that imprisoning or arresting a person “without observing the procedures” must be punished. Moreover, the Constitution also contains Article , which establishes that people cannot be “arrested, detained, searched, or compelled to reside in a specified place” unlawfully. Finally, the Prison Regulation Act / establishes the need for a legal authorisation for imprisonment. Thus, there are multiple legal safeguards, but they might not be entirely successful in achieving the desired level of protection of human rights based on the above-presented reports and literature. Overall, however, there are very little data that directly concern Kuwaiti police, especially in academic sources. The topic of Kuwaiti police is a clearly understudied area of knowledge, which limits the conclusions that can be drawn from the presented information. Prosecutors are a part of the judicial system of Kuwait, appearing in the courts of different levels, and they represent the prosecution. Public Prosecution members as defined by the Constitution defend the interests of the community of Kuwait. The role of the prosecution is to conduct “penal charges on behalf of society,” as well as supervise “the affairs of judicial police, the enforcement of penal laws, the pursuit of offenders, and the execution of judgments.” The only exception is the “prosecution of misdemeanours,” which can be carried out by the police.  In accordance with the Decree Law No.  of , the decision regarding the appointment of the candidates is made by a body called the Supreme Judicial Council. The latter is comprised of the Heads and Deputies of Kuwaiti Courts (including Court of Cassation, Court of First Instance, Court of Appeal, and Supreme Court of Appeal), as well as the Public Prosecutor. A representative of the Ministry of Justice is also present in the Council, but they are prohibited from voting. The activities of the Council are governed by the law in accordance with the Constitution. The appointment decision is carried out by the Minister of Justice through decrees as specified by the Decree Law No.  of . Thus, since the decision is made by the Council, which consists of the representatives of the judiciary, it can be suggested that the appointment of prosecutors does not depend on the Minister. Liability to prosecution is governed by the Kuwait Penal Code. Prosecutors also play a key part of just proceedings, and their independence is critical. However, according to a recent report by Morison and Grimshaw, the prosecutors that were interviewed for it “appeared not to fully understand their role during the trial process”. Apart from that, the authors report that the problem of insufficient separation of powers between police and prosecutors seems to be problematic. Specifically, their investigative powers were found to be ineffectively distributed between these two groups, resulting in the above-specified confusion, and there was little coordination between them, especially as related to authorisation. Furthermore, the International Association of Democratic Lawyers points out that there is “no specific code of conduct” meant for prosecutors, and the report by Morison and Grimshaw supports the idea. These issues make it difficult to define prosecutorial duties in Kuwait related to their roles and responsibilities, especially during the different stages of the prosecutorial process. Thus, the literature on the topic identifies some pertinent procedures and concerns, but in general, Kuwaiti prosecution does not receive sufficient coverage in modern research, which makes describing this topic very difficult. As a result, no reliable source was found that would critique the details of the prosecution processes in Kuwait. The Judicial system of Kuwait consists of the Courts of First Instance, the Courts of Appeal, the Supreme Court or Court of Cassation, and the Constitutional Court. The courts of the first two degrees are comprised of three judges, and the Supreme Court consists of the court’s heads, deputies, and Consultants. The Constitutional Court is comprised of five Consultants. The first- and second-degree courts and the Supreme Court also incorporate multiple circuits dedicated to particular law branches. The Constitution points out that the Military courts are “restricted to deal with military offenses committed by members of the Armed and Public Security Forces within the limits prescribed by Law”. This information is based on primary sources, as well as the recent report by Morison and Grimshaw, which, in turn, also cites primary sources. As a result, the presented information is likely to be reliable. The information below, on the other hand, is more reliant on secondary sources, but their high quality and similarities in the reported issues are also a solution for improving the quality of the findings of this literature review. Multiple concerns have been raised regarding the Kuwaiti justice system. According to the recent report by Morison and Grimshaw, the judicial supervision is crucial for Kuwaiti criminal justice, but no direct guidelines on this process exist. Furthermore, the independence of the judiciary is established Articles , , and  of the Constitution. The Kuwaiti judiciary is supposed to be completely separated from the Amir, since “no Authority may wield any dominion over a Judge”. But the judges are expected to perform their duties in the name of the Amir. Also, it is apparent that a country’s judicial system is unlikely to be completely immune to varied external forces. Still, Alkarama Foundation, which is a non-governmental organisation, insists that the Constitution of Kuwait postulates and demands the independence of the system from the direct influence of external forces, including the executive power. The effectiveness of Articles may be undermined by the fact that senior judicial officials are appointed by the Minister of Justice (who belongs to the administrative branch of power) through decrees. However, the Minister has to consult the Supreme Judicial Council before the appointment, and Decree Law No.  of  specifies that the decision should belong to the Supreme Judicial Council, which is comprised predominantly of the representatives of the judicial branch of power. The rest of the officials are appointed by the Supreme Judicial Council. However, as pointed out by Brown, the Council includes the mentioned senior officials and is not independent in its funding. Moreover, foreign judges are appointed after requests by the Ministry of Justice, without any discussions with the Council. Apart from that, the Minister is lawfully vested with the power to supervise the judiciary system in accordance with the Decree  of . Thus, certain aspects of judiciary-related procedures appear to undermine the independence of the judiciary. Some of the historical developments in the field of judicial independence can be regarded as adversely affecting the separation of powers. According to Brown, there was a notable attempt to make the justice system more independent in the 1980s, which was curbed as a result of the suspension of Parliament in  and reintroduced in the 1990s in the form of new proposals. In particular, the 1990s saw a decree limiting the independence of the judiciary; it prevented the Courts from considering acts of sovereignty. The decree was not repealed to this day. Thus, there is a need for continuous development of separation of powers to ensure the independence of Kuwaiti judges. Other problems pertinent to the judges of Kuwait may also pose a threat to human rights. According to Williamson, they may include transparency issues. Moreover, the author reports that although judgements are usually declared to be in line with the principle of equality of all citizens before the law, they tend to take a lot of time to “move their way through the court system,” which implies the existence of red tape. According to Liebesny, challenges in the Kuwaiti legal system “arose initially since the courts, staffed by lawyers from Arab countries whose systems had been modernised many years ago, were not familiar with the background of the Kuwaiti system,” and moreover, “the Kuwaiti court clerks and police officers on their part found the precipitous introduction of a largely alien system hard to cope with”. Williamson also agrees that “the strong presence of foreign (mainly Egyptian) judges working in the Kuwait judiciary,” which was the result of the legal system of Kuwait being developed with the help of Egyptian specialists, especially Dr Abdel-Razzaq al-Sanhouri, in the 1960s, creates a challenge for the system. The numbers of expatriates in various sectors of Kuwaiti government used to be greater in the 1960s, but their susceptibility toward the influence of the Ministry of Justice is still a concern. In particular, the fact that judges in Kuwait are often non-citizens can undermine a sense of their legitimacy when they need to be regarded as the highest authority in determining punishments. Brown points out that the need for foreign judges is typical for some Arab countries due to their shorter legal history, which may result in less-established law schools. He emphasises, however, that Kuwait’s legal history is sufficient to avoid employing foreign lawyers and that Egyptian lawyers can only take overseas contracts (through which they are recruited in Kuwait) for a limited number of years, which, in his view, makes the problem less acute but still present. Currently, Egyptian judges are appointed for four years (with a possible two-year extension) through an Egypt-approved request from the Kuwaiti Ministry of Justice; the Alkarama Foundation reports that as of , there were  Egyptian judges working in Kuwait. The source also suggests that the appointment of foreign judges would be expected to reduce the problem of the elitism of the judiciary, but it should be pointed out that Kuwaiti judges hold their posts for a lifetime, even though they can be removed from this position in the case of misconduct. Thus, it can be implied that, as stated by Williamson, Kuwait suffers “from unnecessarily complicated, inflexible and sometimes outdated laws and procedures, not to mention frustrating bureaucracy”. As a result, the authority of the courts becomes questionable. In this context, there is the possibility of the introduction of the jury system in Kuwait to increase the potential for fair trials, but researchers state that the criminal justice system of the state may be not prepared for this pattern. It should be pointed out that, as emphasised by Rosiny and many others, judicial independence and transparency appear to be commonly challenging to achieve, while corruption is difficult to avoid in a variety of countries, indicating that the problems are not unique to Kuwait and its separation of powers. For example, Ashworth considers the topic of the separation of powers and responsibilities in the field of restorative justice, highlighting the role of government in ensuring the independence of justice, and pointing out that state-led justice tends to have flaws and can result in failures. In particular, Ashworth states that “the list of failures of state justice is a lengthy one”. Still, Brown asserts that since the 1990s the process of increasing judicial independence in Kuwait has been in motion. This process illustrates the fact that the government tends to develop and evolve together with the evolution of the separation of powers. The criminal justice system requires resources for functioning just like any other system. In particular, funding, human resources, equipment (for instance, police cars or computers) are necessary as stated by Travis and Edwards. However, according to the recent report on Kuwaiti criminal justice system by Morison and Grimshaw, resources in it are not distributed adequately. Therefore, at least one issue pertinent to the topic can be encountered in relevant literature. However, the topic of resources within the criminal justice system of Kuwait appears to be otherwise uncovered by recent and less recent literature, which limits the ability of the current study to draw conclusions on it. At the same time, data is another resource, and the criminal justice system, as well as the people outside of it who try to improve it (for instance, the representatives of the executive branch), lack the information that can help them in their attempts. The Kuwait International Legal Research Centre seems to recognise the problem and commission relevant investigations, but more studies like the recent report and this research are required. Article  of the Constitution which requires separation of powers, as well as the cooperation of powers, states that “No Authority shall be allowed to waive all or part of its jurisdiction”. Therefore, the Article guarantees separation of powers and implies that each of the components of criminal justice of Kuwait must act in accordance with their authority. The significance of establishing separation of powers has already been mentioned by Samuels and others, which suggests that the implications of Article  for the functioning of the criminal justice system should be notable and beneficial. However, as it was mentioned above, the cases when the authority of the elements of the criminal justice system was underdefined or waived (for instance, in the case of the Decree Law No.  of ) do occur. Consequently, the literature indicates that Article  is not always followed, but following it is crucial for ensuring separation of powers and the lack of power abuse. As a result of the present review of literature, no studies that would comprehensively consider the criminal justice separation of powers in Kuwait were found, but the research and reports on the aspects that can be included in the discussion were encountered. In particular, the majority of the significant aspects of the criminal justice system can be described relatively well, which offers the opportunity for analysis. Similarly, the diffusion of law has been discussed relatively extensively. Also, the problems experienced by the criminal justice system in Kuwait appear to have received some coverage. The fact that the topic is understudied, as well as the limitations in the quality of some of the sources, restricts the ability of this thesis to respond to the research questions, but still, the following information can be presented. The history of the development of Kuwaiti legal system has defined its features and some of its problems. Kuwait had experienced the impact of British jurisdiction for a long period, but when the country gained independence from the United Kingdom in , the civil law system, based on the Egyptian law, which, in turn, is developed in accordance with the French law, was established in the country in addition to traditional Islamic law. However, the hasty introduction of the new legislation, as well as some of its inefficiencies, and the introduction of Egyptian lawyers into the Kuwaiti legal system have caused some long-lasting issues. The Constitution of Kuwait requires separation of powers and independence of the judiciary while also granting the citizens all the necessary rights and proclaiming them equal in the eyes of the law. Still, the mentioned problems, especially those related to transparency and red tape, might endanger those rights. Moreover, there is some evidence indicating that the independence of judiciary being limited legislatively. Apart from that, the literature on the topic indicates other inefficiencies in various elements of the criminal justice system of Kuwait. Given the fact that the literature on the topic is generally rather scarce, it seemed apparent that other methods of data collection could be useful. As a result, the current investigation was launched, and the details of its methodology can be found in the following chapter. The issues that were found with the help of the literature were used to develop the interview questions that would enable the researcher to gather more data on the positive and negative aspects of the criminal justice system in Kuwait with attention paid to separation of powers and its ability to protect the rights of Kuwaiti citizens. The resulting interview protocol can be found in Appendix B. The research was conducted with a focus on the review of primary sources and laws that provide the basis for the development of the criminal justice system in Kuwait. The main sources include the Constitution of Kuwait and the series of laws determining the principles of the country’s judiciary system. In addition to the overview and analysis of primary sources, it was also necessary to work with secondary sources, such as journal articles and studies that have been conducted by researchers in the field of world criminal justice and in the area of the criminal justice and legal systems of Kuwait. Qualitative interviews were employed to complement the missing data from the primary and secondary sources; they became the core of the present work. This section will consider the key elements of the methodology, justifying the chosen methods and offering definitions for them.The present investigation is guided by the postpositivist perspective. As suggested by Frane, it is an approach to research philosophy that aims to upgrade positivism (which can be described as the “philosophy of science”) by incorporating some of its ideas and rejecting other ones. Cunliffe reports that from the postpositivist perspective, knowledge is perceived as replicable, sharable, and capable of being accumulated, which is reminiscent of positivism. Similarly, Cunliffe states that in post-positivism, objective reality is believed to exist, and Frane highlights that people are expected to be capable of constructing knowledge based on high-quality evidence. However, the evaluation of the quality of evidence is not limited by its quantification, which is characteristic of positivism, and the contexts of studied phenomena are taken into account in post-positivism the way they would be considered in non-positivist approaches. Thus, the postpositivist perspective upgrades positivism in a way that would help it acknowledge and effectively frame qualitative research studies. According to May, qualitative research refers to an approach to investigation that works with qualitative data: words and meanings; it seeks to investigate and explore phenomena.  The choice of the qualitative approach for the present study can be justified through multiple factors. First, as shown by Dobinson and Johns, this approach has been employed in legal research with success, which implies that it can be selected for the present study as well. Second, qualitative methodology is supported by the postpositivist philosophy, which is demonstrated by Frane. Third, the phenomenon that is being studied can benefit from qualitative research since the evidence to the existence of separation of powers and its guarantees, as well as their contribution to the protection of human rights, is most likely to be qualitative. Similarly, the determination of the ways to ensure human rights protection, which needs to be explored, is also going to require the collection and analysis of qualitative information (expert opinions). Some of the phenomena that the present study is going to consider can only be traced through qualitative means, including, for example, the diffusion of law in Kuwait. This idea can also be supported by the separation of powers criteria discussed above. Indeed, the separation of powers criteria, which have been developed based on the literature review, predominantly focus on the analysis of procedures related to appointment and supervision of the judiciary, case management details, specifics of police conduct, and so on. All these criteria would require qualitative evidence. Consequently, the criteria can only be applied within a methodology that incorporates qualitative methods. The nature of the research questions is also noteworthy: most of them are exploratory and require the in-depth investigation of phenomena, which, as stated by May, is typically done through qualitative research. Therefore, in order to answer the research questions of the study, it would be necessary to employ qualitative methods. Thus, qualitative research can generate and analyse the required evidence for the study while also being capable of responding to the research question and being in line with the work’s philosophy. In the present study, qualitative research is carried out in two forms. First of all, a literature review is carried out to determine the already existing knowledge on the topic. Then, interviews are conducted to cover some of the gaps in the current knowledge. Both approaches can be viewed as types of qualitative research in legislation as shown by Dobinson and Johns. For example, the report of the Kuwait International Legal Research Centre on criminal justice in Kuwait employed a similar combination of methods. As pointed out by Hair, Celsi, Money and Page, the use of several methods is one of the approaches to triangulation, which improves the rigour of the study. Apart from that, given the scarcity of literature on the topic, the use of interviews with specialists allows expanding data sources. Thus, the chosen approaches complement each other and help to investigate the phenomena of interest in greater detail. According to Edwards and Holland, interviews are a particularly popular, commonly-used, well-established, and well-described qualitative method. The present study chooses them for their ability to contribute the data that would provide insights into phenomena and connections between them. Interviews are also an appropriate method from the postpositivist perspective as shown by Cunliffe. Interviews can assist in employing the knowledge of experts in studies, which the present study intends to do in order to complement the literature review results. There are several approaches to interviews. On the one hand, as shown by May, there are individual and group interviews. The former type is more effective in bringing out personal perspectives while the latter is usually used to discuss shared experiences. Since the study does not focus on group experiences and is mostly interested in individual expertise, individual interviews were chosen for it. Furthermore, as pointed out by Edwards and Holland and Eriksson and Kovalainen, interviews vary in the level of their flexibility. Structured interviews are the least flexible, and unstructured interviews technically have no structure. However, semi-structured interviews have a structure (typically, a set of questions) but also offer flexibility and allow the interviewee to deviate from the planned discussion with the aim of gaining more insights on the topic. As suggested by Hair et al., the latter interview version offers a balance, which seems to be beneficial to the current research; as a result, the semi-structured option was chosen. Certain limitations of semi-structured interviews should be mentioned. First, Edwards and Holland report that like the majority of qualitative research methods, they produce the evidence that cannot be replicated and that can be viewed as “subjective” (biased). However, these limitations can be disputed: Edwards and Holland specify that replicability issues can be resolved through the rigorous planning of the procedures, and bias is a problem that is not interview-specific. In fact, Alshenqeeti points out that no research is actually free from bias since the results are interpreted by the researcher. Consequently, it is necessary to acknowledge the problem and review the findings while taking into account this limitation. The interviews took between  and  minutes with the average time amounting to a little over  minutes (see Appendix A). The development of the interview tool is also a noteworthy topic. The questions for it were created in order to provide all the information that is necessary for the study, including the data that would help to respond to the research questions and that which would assist in identifying the interviewees’ ability to perform the task. The separation of powers criteria considered above were also used to guide the tool development, and an extended question is devoted specifically to their analysis. Triangulation was used to improve the tool as suggested by Hair et al.: five independent people with researcher backgrounds (University educators) were involved in the process to ensure that the final product is understandable, focused, well-structured, and lacks redundant questions. As a result,  questions were chosen for the final tool, which is attached in Appendix B. The tool was developed in English, but it was translated into Arabic and checked by five experts to ensure that nothing could be lost in translation. The choice to use Arabic was made because although the interviewees speak English, their native language is Arabic. This decision was made predominantly to make the interviewees comfortable and capable of expressing their ideas without any language barriers. In summary, the convenience considerations were a significant element of the development of the tool. Dobinson and Johns state that the justification of its sample is crucial for the quality of a qualitative study. The sampling process was guided by the quota approach, which, as pointed out by May, refers to a non-probability method that consists of choosing a specific number (quota) of people from particular subgroups within the sampled population. As a non-probability method, quota sampling is not appropriate for generalisation purposes, but since the study does not intend to provide generalisable results, this fact does not appear to be a major hindrance. The method was chosen because the sample attempted to ensure the equal representation of the subgroups of the participants. The participants included the people who are familiar with Kuwaiti legislation: judges, lawyers, parliament members, legal professionals, and academic legal specialists (university academics). It is noteworthy that parliament members with law degrees were approached under the assumption that they are more likely to be familiar with Kuwaiti legislation, which was an important aspect of the research. Police members were approached, but they refused to participate, which is why this area of the executive branch could not be represented. The reason for their refusal was that the process of approving research participation for them would take a long time and could lead to rejection for security reasons. As a result, the sample was designed to include other members of executive power. Additionally, prosecutors were considered, but since judges in Kuwait operate as prosecutors before being appointed, it was assumed that judges could contribute prosecutor experiences to the study. This decision may have become a limitation since the literature on Kuwaiti prosecution is very scarce, but future research may further fill that gap. Furthermore, the judicial branch was deemed already represented in the sample. It is apparent that the first three groups represent the three authorities; as for the latter, they are particularly well-familiar with the topic of interest. Another inclusion criterion was based on the need to recruit specialists: only people between  and  were recruited. The information was collected by directly asking the participants about their age before the interviews. The minimum age criterion was aimed at ensuring that the participants have some experience with Kuwaiti law. As for the maximum age criterion, it was necessary to avoid recruiting the elderly population, which might result in the ethical concerns of involving a vulnerable population in research since, as pointed out by Lahman, the elderly can be viewed as a vulnerable group. Even though there is no universal definition of the elderly population, it was assumed that the people nearing the retirement age might be considered vulnerable. In Kuwait,  years is the retirement age for both genders in most cases, and even though there have been some attempts to change it, this age was used to determine the elderly group for this thesis. It should also be noted that  is a common age of retirement in Kuwait, and the judges who are older than  but are still working are likely to be members of the Supreme Court, which could not be accessed during this research. In summary, participant selection was geared by the ability of the participants to respond to the research questions, which would be based on their expertise and experience with Kuwaiti criminal justice system, as well as some ethical considerations. The checklist that summarises the information about the participants can be found in Appendix A. It demonstrates that all the quotas required recruiting  representatives of each position that was targeted by the study. Apart from that, it indicates that seven of the participants were female (%) and only five of the participants (%) were younger than . The checklist presents the basic information about the participants that may be of consequence for the study. It should be noted that the demographic features of the sample were determined during the first part of every interview and that all the ethical considerations which are connected to their exposure in Appendix A were considered. It can be suggested that the disclosure of important information may be problematic, but it is not the case for these data. The participants agreed to provide the information about their ages and gender. Moreover, it is not possible to identify the participants based on the provided information because it is not sufficient: all the participants come from rather large and diverse groups, which prevents their identification. It is also noteworthy that age and gender are important characteristics which are often of use in research and can be employed to describe a sample, especially when they can affect its representativeness or responses in any way. In the case of this work, the inclusion of people of different gender diversifies the sample and introduces new perspectives. The age and position, on the other hand, can be viewed as the factors that can indicate the experience and expertise of the people involved in research. Thus, their introduction and mentioning in this work are justified. The sampling quotas were also connected to the fact that qualitative data requires more time to analyse than quantitative; consequently, as pointed out by Dobinson and Johns, the researcher needed to take into account the resources, especially time constraints of the research, to make sure that the sample is feasible. May warns that smaller samples have the problem of not being very representative or generalisable, but for the present study, it need not be a problem. Indeed, the study does not intend to make generalisable conclusions about the population it samples; in fact, it does not study the population. Rather, the participants are employed to gather expert knowledge and opinions. The procedures that were completed to ensure the protection of the rights of the participants should also be mentioned due to their utmost significance for any research, which is highlighted by May. The participation is fully anonymous and confidential; while the study requires the collection of the data that can demonstrate the expertise of the interviewees, no identifying information was obtained. The participants were anonymised with the help of codes (Participant Identification Numbers). The audio-recordings of the interviews are only available to the researcher and kept in a secure location (the researcher’s home) on an electronic device under password protection. Other researchers might be granted access to the transcripts, and the final report will contain some quotations, but no personal or identifying information will be present in either transcripts or quotations. The participants were informed about all the study procedures in their participant information sheets (see Appendix C), along with the risks and benefits of participating. The sheet expressly stated that the participation had to be voluntary and highlighted the fact that withdrawal could occur at any moment. Having read the participant information sheet, the participants were presented with the informed consent forms (see Appendix D), which repeated some of the crucial details from the information sheet, including the need to tape the interview, the use of anonymised information and quotes in the report, and the fact that the anonymised transcript might be reviewed by people other than the researcher. The participants were only interviewed if and after they had signed the consent form. Copies of the information sheet and informed consent forms were provided to the participants. The participants were contacted with the help of e-mails or through a visit to their office with the aim of scheduling an interview. The latter option was a requirement for judges and parliament members due to their workload; they were also exceedingly difficult to schedule for the same reason. However, the enthusiasm of the participants helped in getting interviews with them. The present study is going to employ thematic analysis for its data. The choice of the type of analysis is defined by the needs and specifics of the study, as well as the features of the approach to analysis. According to Braun and Clarke, as well as Eriksson and Kovalainen and others, thematic analysis can be defined as an approach to data analyses that focuses on determining and investigating “patterns (themes) within data”. A theme, in turn, is a pattern that appears in the data and that is pertinent to the research question; its size or frequency of appearance can vary since, as pointed out by Braun and Clarke and Vaismoradi, Jones, Turunen, and Snelgrove, a flexible approach to the term can benefit the study. Themes are associated with codes, which are the basic elements of data that might be pertinent to the research question; themes unite the multiple codes. If a study aims for a rich description of the data set, Braun and Clarke insist that the prevalence of themes is going to need to be considered as well. Thematic analysis is a particularly widely used approach, which might be viewed as the “foundational method” of qualitative analysis because the identification of themes in qualitative data is a core component of many qualitative analyses as reported by Braun and Clarke. The authors also state that the approach is relatively accessible, flexible and compatible with a wide variety of philosophies and epistemological stances. Therefore, it is applicable to the present study. In the present study, which combines literature review methodology with the interview analysis, the thematic analysis is likely to be classified as “theoretical”: in other words, it employs the existing coding frames and focuses on a specific, well-developed research question. However, the flexibility for a more inductive approach is also present. Apart from that, the present study focuses on explicit themes that appear at the semantic level. This choice is guided by the postpositivist approach and aims at limiting the possibility of the misinterpretation of the gathered data, which is described as a relatively common concern for thematic analysis by Edwards and Holland. Since the study provides the participants with direct questions in order to draw upon their expert opinions, it appears more reasonable to focus on the semantic level. According to Braun and Clarke, the key stages of thematic analysis include the processes of familiarising with the data, initial code generation, theme search, theme review, theme definition and naming, and the organisation of the report of the themes. Additional activities may also be singled out by other authors, but the key actions are defined as presented. Braun and Clarke report that the identification of themes is continuous and starts before the analysis, for example, with the determination of research questions and literature review. The presentation of results can take the form of a table, and the present study intends to use this form. In particular, the specifics of the collected data are going to be organised in a table that presents the themes, codes that they incorporate, and the prevalence of themes in different groups of participants. Thus, by employing a well-established method of data analysis, the present study will be able to answer the research questions using the themes identified in them, as well as additional ones. The following details about the thematic analysis that was carried out as a part of this research can be specified. The present thesis did not employ a specific software for qualitative analysis for the lack of a professional who would be familiar with its use. While it was possible for the researcher to learn to use the software, it would require additional resources, especially time, which rendered this option less feasible than manual investigation. Additionally, manual analysis is a common approach to thematic analysis, and it has been shown to be effective. For instance, Braun and Clarke focus on manual techniques and give related advice, which was also employed for the present research. Therefore, the choice is justified by the needs of the study and the effectiveness of the method. The following procedures were used to ensure the quality of the resulting themes. The study mostly followed the instructions of Braun and Clarke that are described above in that the first element of the work was the familiarisation with the data. It involved the repeated reading of the transcripts of interviews, which included taking notes with the ideas and patterns that were starting to emerge. The process also overlapped with the next stage, that is, the generation of initial codes, which were based on the general patterns that the researcher was identifying. The two first stages were carried out together with the interviews, and they were used to determine the data saturation. When no new codes could be discovered, it was established that data saturation was achieved. This process resulted in a list of specific codes that were then used for the third stage. During the third stage, the codes were reread to identify the themes, which are more general than codes and tend to unite them into groups. During this element of the analysis, the researcher started drafting the table, which united the more general patterns and the more specific codes. However, the initial table differed noticeably from the one presented in this report. According to Braun and Clarke, the use of tables for this stage is a common and appropriate tool that facilitates the process of theme identification. The resulting table was then used to present the “candidate themes,” which were revised during the fourth stage. The process mostly involved further solidifying the themes because the initial ones were often interrelated. For instance, the eventual theme of the characteristics of Kuwaiti judicial system united the initial ones which were devoted to transparency, bureaucracy, and other factors. Appendix E can be used to demonstrate this tendency toward the development of more general themes. The fourth stage proved to be particularly difficult, but it was necessary to ensure the validity of the themes. It involved the consideration of the themes, codes, and raw data to determine if the themes could effectively represent the data and form coherent patterns. Also, the researcher attempted to distance from the data as was suggested by Vaismoradi, Jones, Turunen, and Snelgrove: the authors believe that the rectification of themes is enhanced if the data is set aside for some time. The researcher chose to cease all analysis-related procedures for two days, after which the themes were reviewed and compared to the data once again. The process did yield some changes, but it is not clear if that happened because of additional checking or the distancing. After six cycles of revision, the last of which did not involve any changes, the themes were established, and the fifth phase of naming them and their sub-themes was concluded. The result can be seen in Appendix E. The final step, which is the report, involved using the key themes to structure the findings chapter. Based on the content of each theme and its frequency, as well as the frequency of its codes, some themes were united with other ones while some of them were provided with greater attention. Also, the themes were presented in an order that would be logical and follow from the more general topics (like separation of powers) to more specific ones (like the problems with separation of powers in Kuwait). Overall, the structure of the findings chapter was guided by the need to present the relevant information in an efficient, logical, and engaging way. The ethical issues of the study are predominantly connected to the fact that it employs human subjects. As a result, their safety, privacy, and autonomy were critical to protect.  Throughout the project, these considerations were taken into account, but they were especially significant during planning and recruitment stages. The sampling section points out some of the ethical issues, but this one will detail all of them in a consistent manner. From the perspective of autonomy, the primary requirement is that participation in the study has to be voluntary. In order to make it voluntary, the participants were provided with information sheets and informed consent documents to ensure that they could learn everything about the study prior to participation. Additionally, the participants were informed about the possibility of withdrawing at any time, which is also an important element of ethical research. Thus, their voluntary and informed participation was secured, and their autonomy was respected. From the perspective of privacy and safety, the handling of data was important. Thus, the participants were informed about the measures meant to protect their privacy beforehand, and they have also agreed to all the relevant activities. Consequently, they did not mind the recording of the interviews, and they were accepting of the need to report their demographics. Thus, their autonomy was respected once again while taking into account their safety and privacy. Other than that, the data were kept confidential with only the researcher having access to it; in due time, the raw data will be destroyed, and, as can be seen from the report, no direct references to the identifying information of the participants have been made. Furthermore, while designing the study, the risks were considered, which is also common practice. Given the fact that the project involved interviews with minimal risks of discomfort (the interviews were not covering any sensitive topics), the participants were informed of the high safety of the procedures. However, one of the relatively risky activities that were involved was the disclosure of the demographic data. With the limited number of, for example, MPs, the demographics could be potentially identifying. It is still difficult to find the specific people using the presented information, however, and the participants had agreed to the measure, which implies that ethically, it is acceptable. To summarize, the ethical considerations of the study were crucial because of the involvement of human subjects, and their participation was predicated on the principles of autonomy, safety, and privacy. While there was at least one difficult decision to make, these principles helped to keep the participants safe and ensure their willingness to contribute to the study. The limitations of the study are the results of some of its methodological choices. They are important to consider when interpreting the results and drawing conclusion, but since they are a part of the methodology, they will be mentioned here as well. The sample is not very large, and the specifics of the data collection approach imply the strong possibility of personal bias. Additionally, as a qualitative study, this thesis cannot ensure a representative review of perspectives; rather, it introduces existing perspectives, which were drawn from different branches of power. Therefore, while it represents different views, it cannot be considered representative. The sample also failed to include certain participants, especially police officers, who refused to participate, and prosecutors, who were deemed represented by the judges. The literature review was plagued with the issue of limited research on the topic. Finally, only one person performed the analysis, which means that personal bias could have affected the results. The reason for choosing these methods consists of their benefits. Indeed, while qualitative methods, especially interviews, do not provide representative data, these approaches are most suitable for the in-depth examination of a topic. Similarly, small samples would be inappropriate in quantitative research, but in qualitative research, the stated sample is not very small. Also it provides the opportunity to represent different perspectives and ensures the collection of a manageable amount of data. The issue of police officer refusing to participate could not be alleviated, but the executive branch of power is still represented in the research. Similarly, the absence of prosecutors is alleviated by including judges, who have even more diverse and expansive experiences. The choice to involve only one researcher was explained by the project’s limitations, especially monetary ones. It can also be noted that only one person got access to the participants’ data, which is a positive outcome from the ethical perspective. Additionally, the limitations were managed to an extent. Thus, the ability of interviews to be affected by personal perspective was managed by introducing different branches of power and multiple people in each subgroup. Additionally, not all data came from the interviews; a lot of information was gathered from the literature review. The primary limitation of the latter method was the small amount of relevant information, especially on Kuwait. However, together, the literature review and interviews contributed to triangulation, which addressed the limitations of both methods. Data saturation has also been achieved, which is critical for a high-quality qualitative study. Finally, a specific limitation is the focus of the thesis on the independence of the judiciary. While the presented literature can justify this attention, it still means that the project presents a relatively one-sided view on the separation of powers in the judiciary. However, given the lack of the literature related to the topic, this approach is justifiable.To summarize, the chosen methods have a number of limitations, but they also have advantages, and they were chosen for the latter. The limitations were controlled to an extent, but most importantly, the understanding of the limitations enables a thoughtful analysis of the data; the consideration of these issues during data analysis and the drawing of conclusions improves the quality of this thesis. Thus, the problem of limitations was handled as recommended by the literature on the topic.The methodology of the study can be summarised in the following way. The adopted philosophy consists of the postpositivist perspective, which incorporates some of the positivist ideas and expands them with other ones. The work employs the qualitative approach to study design, using the methods of literature review and semi-structured interviews. Thematic analysis is chosen to process the data due to the fact that it is a well-established and convenient method that can be applied to the data collected by the study. The recruitment of the participants (a total of  people) was carried out with the help of quota sampling to ensure the representation of the key occupations that are expected to indicate expertise (belonging to branches of separation of powers, the criminal justice system of Kuwait, or the academic community). All the ethical considerations pertinent to carrying out a study with participants were reviewed, and anonymity, confidentiality, and voluntary nature of participation were ensured. The specific methods fit into the chosen approach and are in line with the postpositivist perspective, which means that the study’s methodology is consistent. All the responses of the  participants were analysed with the help of thematic analysis, which produced the themes and subthemes that are presented in Appendix E. This section will consider each of the themes individually and describe them, using the examples and quotes from the participants’ responses. The final sample corresponds to the one planned. As can be seen in Figure , a little more than one-fourth of the participants were female (see Figure ). Most participants (nine or %) were between  and  years old. Only  participants (%) were younger than  (see Figure ). All the planned quotas were taken into account, and five participants were recruited from each group. The following groups were included: Parliament Members (PM, legislative authority), Judges (J, judicial authority), Lawyers (LW), Professionals (P, executive authority), and Academics (AC). All the participants reported being able to respond to the questions on the topic, and only one of them (P3) expressed uncertainty, stating that she is not a specialist in the field, which is why her account might be imprecise. In general, though, the positions and age of participants imply that they would be relatively familiar with the separation of powers, especially from the perspective of Kuwait. Therefore, the recruited people were experts who could provide informed opinions to be analysed in this thesis. None of the participants suggests that the topics of interest are not important or should not be studied. Some of the participants specifically emphasise the idea that the topics of the thesis are important and require the coverage of the practical and theoretical research. Moreover, some of the respondents believe that currently, the topics do not receive sufficient coverage. According to one of the MPs “we really have a vacuum in research specialised in the separation of powers in criminal justice”. In addition to that, the idea of reviewing the separation of powers from the criminal justice perspective receives some support. In particular, PM2 approves of the perspective of the study, explicitly stating that “of course, the separation of powers is very important in terms of criminal justice”. Another interviewee believes that there “is almost no research focusing on the separation of powers in criminal justice”. In fact, several participants note that the constitutional separation of powers tends to receive greater coverage in research. PM5 also highlights the importance of paying attention to the “separation of powers or criminal justice in Kuwait,” suggesting that the context of the country has not been extensively researched either. To clarify, other participants who do not belong to the legislative branch, also support the topics of the thesis; for instance, LW2 (a lawyer) comments that “we have almost no research addressing the separation of powers in criminal justice”. P4 (a legal officer at the Ministry of Justice) expresses some concern over the lack of research in phenomena that are concerned with “the development of criminal justice” in general. Also, a judge states that Kuwaiti criminal justice and separation of powers require more advanced investigation. Thus, the participants are unanimous in supporting and justifying the attention to the topic as an under-researched one. Furthermore, the participants suggest that the present investigation and similar studies would be practically applicable; as expressed by LW4, separation of powers and related topics “actually need a lot of study to help legislators in the Kuwaiti National Assembly recognise the deficiencies in the separation of powers in justice in Kuwait”. Similarly, AC2 (an academic and professor of law) thinks that “we need to discuss these issues to identify the defects in criminal justice in Kuwait and to develop it in the future”. One of the judges also highlights the applicability of this line of inquiry to academic practice; according to J5, “we can develop the course of criminal justice in Kuwait”. Thus, the significance of the topic was rather well-established as can be seen in the table below. The idea that the Kuwaiti legislation is the product of the influence of multiple schools is generally supported by the respondents: all of them acknowledge this fact. A few of them want to highlight the complexity of the phenomenon of hybrid law. For instance, PM1 points out that the diversity of Kuwaiti legislative origins can be further supported by the different “schools in Islamic Law” that have had their impact. Several participants emphasise and discuss particular influences; thus, PM1 decides to dwell on the Islamic and Egyptian influences and even provides the names of the Egyptian contributors to Kuwaiti legislation, including “the jurist Dr Abdul Razzaq Al-Sanhuri, Dr Mohsen Hafez, Othman Khalil Othman and others”. On the other hand, PM3 dedicates some time to explaining the history of Kuwaiti legislation, including Kuwaiti-British relationships and the introduction of Egyptian legislators. Islamic influences are also described as a very positive factor by P5. Thus, some of the participants exhibited a level of interest to particular sources of Kuwaiti law hybridisation, and the Egyptian, Islamic, and British influences were the primary ones. Several participants also suggested that the diversity of the influences which have shaped Kuwaiti legislation “distinguishes” the latter makes it unique, “distinct”. The idea that the mixed origins make the Kuwaiti legislation better was also voiced. In particular, it was suggested that the origins of Kuwaiti legislation make it flexible and beneficial for separation of powers and democracy. Also, some of the participants believe that having a variety of sources is helpful for legislators. This idea is supported by PM4 who states that the hybrid nature of Kuwaiti law “has provided us, the legislators, with many channels to obtain our legislative sources”. A similar sentiment is expressed by one of the lawyers who asserts that “surely, the multiplicity of sources of the law is in favour of the Kuwaiti legislator”. Similarly, one legal officer believes that the “multiplicity of sources” fosters “creativity and innovation”. Positive comments about the hybridity of the law are very common in the sample, although a few participants remain simply neutral, stating the presence of different legislative influences as a matter of fact. According to P1, the Kuwaiti legislation is also “consistent with the nature of its people”. The above-presented statements imply that the participants generally view Kuwaiti legislation from a favourable perspective. One participant does point it out that, in general, varied legislative sources may result in confusion. However, according to this interviewee, there are no contradictions within the resulting legislation that could be attributed to hybridisation.  As a result, the participant believes that the nature of Kuwaiti legislation is at least not harmful to the country, which supports the idea that this legislation is favoured by many of the interviewees. These findings respond to one of the research questions of the study and provide some evidence which suggests that separation of powers can be supported by the legislation of Kuwait (see table below). A wide variety of functions were attributed to separation of powers by the participants. First, they noted that separation of powers is required for the independence of the three authorities, including the judiciary. As stated by PM1, the separation of powers is “one of the important principles and guarantees of justice, integrity, and the authorities’ supervision of each other, with them being separate and independent powers”. Second, the significance of separation of powers for democracy was supported. As put by J5, separation of powers “is the essence of the democratic system”. In contrast, the lack of separation of powers was associated with dictatorship and absolute power in the participants’ responses. As emphasized by PM3, “the separation of powers limits the monopolisation of decisions and procedures”. According to J4, the developers of the Constitution were aware of this fact and specifically worked to incorporate the principle of separation of powers into the Constitution to ensure that the judiciary would be independent and that the rights of the citizens would be protected when accused. Consequently, several participants also noted the idea that human rights are supported by separation of powers. Other functions that were noted included the improvement of transparency and the reduction of corruption in the government and the criminal justice system. The ultimate goal of separation of powers was reported to be concerned with public justice. In particular, J5 demonstrates that all or most of the separation of powers functions are required for public justice. Thus, the mentioned functions of separation of powers are shown to contribute to the eventual goal of a just judiciary system that can uphold public justice as can be seen in the table below and Figure. The majority of the participants explicitly characterise separation of powers as a tool that can effectively ensure the protection of Kuwaiti population, even though some of them also note the issues that Kuwaiti separation of powers experiences. The rest of the participants also commend separation of powers as a principle, but they focus on the difficulties that Kuwaiti separation of powers faces. When considering the guarantees of separation of powers in Kuwait, the majority of the interviewees noted Constitution, but they also mentioned other legislation (Regulation of the Judiciary Law, as well as specific precedents), administrative provisions, the Parliament, Constitutional Court, and even public opinion. The effectiveness of separation of powers in Kuwait can be described as follows: it is generally effective and has a relatively good legislative foundation (especially form of Constitution), but there is a number of issues that “impedes its application, which makes the abuse of power potentially possible”. Red.

